Jul 9, 2010
Sergei Tretyakov, Spy Who Fled to U.S., Dies at 53
nytimes.com/2010/07/10/world/europe/10tretyakov.html

Sergei Tretyakov, a high-ranking Russian spy who defected to the United States after the end of the cold war, died on June 13 at his home in Florida. He was 53. His wife, Helen, announced his death on Friday on the Washington radio station WTOP.
Pete Earley, the author of a book about Mr. Tretyakov, “Comrade J.: The Untold Secrets of Russia’s Master Spy in America After the End of the Cold War” (2008), wrote on his Web site, www.peteearley.com, that Ms. Tretyakov gave the cause of death as coronary arrest, and that she had asked her husband’s friends not to reveal the fact of his death until an autopsy could be performed under the supervision of the F.B.I.
David Winterhalter, the director of investigations for the medical examiner’s office in Sarasota County, Florida, said that an autopsy had been completed and that his office was waiting for standard histology and toxicology tests to be completed before stating the cause of death. The F.B.I., he said, “is aware of everything that is going on.”
Mr. Tretyakov (pronounced tray-tya-COUGH), called Comrade J. by American intelligence officers, defected with his wife and daughter in October 2000. At the time, he held the title of first secretary of the Russian mission in New York and senior aide to the Russian ambassador to the United Nations, Sergey V. Lavrov. In fact he was a colonel in the S.V.R., the Russian intelligence service that replaced the K.G.B. From 1995 to 2000 he was responsible for all covert operations in New York City and at the United Nations.
On his Web site, Mr. Earley, citing “an informed source,” wrote that Mr. Tretyakov did not know any of the 10 Russian agents arrested last month and had not been involved in their operations. Ms. Tretyakov, speaking to WTOP news radio, denied rumors that her husband had tipped off American intelligence officials about the agents. “It wasn’t him who disclosed the names of these people,” she said.
Although Mr. Tretyakov had refused to comment on whether he gave information to the United States while he was a Russian agent, Mr. Earley wrote that he might have cooperated with American intelligence officers for three years before he defected.
At that point, according to Mr. Earley’s book, which is based on extensive interviews with Mr. Tretyakov, he delivered 5,000 top-secret cables to American intelligence officials and, in debriefings by the F.B.I. and C.I.A., provided detailed information about Russian operations in New York, including the names of contacts.
“My defection was the major failure of the Russian intelligence, probably in its whole history,” Mr. Tretyakov told NPR, the public radio network, in 2008.
Sergei Olegovich Tretyakov was born on Oct. 5, 1956, in Moscow. His grandmother had worked for the intelligence services and his father for the Ministry of Foreign Trade, which posted him to Tehran, where Sergei spent his early childhood. While studying at the Institute for Foreign Languages in Moscow, he was recruited by the K.G.B.
“For me it was fascinating,” he said of the intelligence work, speaking to NPR.
He spent his first five years in the K.G.B. in Moscow sifting through Western publications for information of use to the government. In 1990 he was sent to the Soviet mission in Ottawa, where he recruited Canadian informants with an animus toward the United States.
After he defected, he lived in hiding with his wife and daughter, Ksenya, who also survives him. All three became American citizens.
When “Comrade J.” was published, Mr. Tretyakov began making public appearances. After that he lived more or less openly, under his own name and without protection, although when he traveled abroad he had an F.B.I. escort.
In “Comrade J.,” Mr. Tretyakov wrote a long statement explaining his reasons for defecting.
He said he switched sides because he had lost faith in the leaders who succeeded Mikhail S. Gorbachev. “I saw firsthand what kind of people were and are running the country,” he wrote, saying he believed they had enriched themselves and a handful of cronies. “I came to an ultimate conclusion that it became immoral to serve them.”
In a caustic aside, he noted that he had never met with the former Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, a former K.G.B. officer, partly because they worked in different parts of the world, and partly because Mr. Putin was “never successful in intelligence,” and therefore never worked at headquarters. “He was always kept in a provincial K.G.B. station in a low and unimportant position,” he said.
Mr. Tretyakov also said that he defected so that his daughter might have a better life.
“No one recruited me,” he wrote. “No one pitched me. No one convinced me to do what I did.” He theorized that American intelligence officials never approached him because he was seen as an old-style K.G.B. officer.
Mr. Tretyakov emphasized that he had not defected for money and had never asked to be paid for his services. On the contrary, he said, his career in the S.V.R. was flourishing, and by defecting he gave up substantial assets in cash and real estate in Russia.
Mr. Earley, on NPR, said he was told by the F.B.I. that Mr. Tretyakov had received the largest money settlement ever given to a defecting Russian spy, more than $2 million.
To Mr. Earley, Mr. Tretyakov described his work with several operatives he recruited or placed. The recruits included a former member of the Canadian Parliament, a top-ranking verification expert at the International Atomic Energy Agency and a former United Nations official whom Mr. Tretyakov said he installed in the Oil for Food Program, created to allow Iraq to sell oil but not acquire weapons.
That former official, he said, diverted some $500 million from the program to the government of Boris N. Yeltsin and Mr. Putin.
