Nov 18, 2010
Ex-KGB soldier named as double agent who exposed Anna Chapman spy ring
telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/russia/8143693/Ex-KGB-soldier-named-as-double-agent-who-exposed-Anna-Chapman-spy-ring.html

The Russian double agent who exposed a Kremlin spy ring operating in the United States this summer has been unmasked as a former KGB Special Forces soldier whose father was a Hero of the Soviet Union.

Russian intelligence sources told local media that the traitor who gave away Anna Chapman and nine others was Colonel Alexander Poteyev who served in the KGB's elite 'Zenith' Special Forces unit during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.
A criminal case for 'state treason' had been opened against him and he will be tried in absentia like other traitors before him, they said.
The scandal caused huge embarrassment in Russia and triggered the biggest spy swap since the Cold War.
In its wake, President Dmitry Medvedev ordered an internal investigation at the SVR foreign intelligence service, the agency that ran the compromised agents.
Fyodor Yakovlev, a KGB veteran who said he served with Colonel Poteyev in Afghanistan, told the Regnum news agency that he now regarded his former comrade as a "non-person".
"This non-person will live a lonely life until the end of his days in fear," he said. "Lonely because his relatives and loved ones will not be by his side. Either his children will have to alter their appearances or else they will be doomed to the same nightmarish existence as their father."
Colonel Poteyev is believed to have fled to the United States in June through his native Belarus days before the ten agents were arrested in America. He was reportedly deputy director of 'Department S' inside the SVR, the unit which coordinates the work of illegal agents in the United States.
He is reported to have worked in New York in the first half of the 1990s. It was there that the CIA is said to have recruited him, offering him a financial settlement. His wife later became resident in America and his son and daughter moved there before he fled Russia in June.
Initial reports described a man with the same biography but gave him a different name, Colonel Scherbakov, but intelligence sources said that he had fled Russia for the United States years earlier.
Experts believe that details of the betrayal were deliberately leaked to help the Kremlin save face. Being betrayed is better than having your own spies exposed as incompetent, they say.
The scandal also appears to be part of a turf war between the domestic FSB security service and the SVR foreign intelligence service. The FSB is reportedly hoping that the SVR will be so damaged by the affair that it can incorporate it or install its own people in leading positions.
