Nov 11, 2010
Fresh Betrayal
kommersant.ru/doc/1536406

"Kommersant" found out who passed the network of Russian intelligence officers-illegal immigrants to the American special services

The Russian-American espionage scandal that broke out in the summer, according to the authorities of the Russian Federation, was the result of betrayal. But unlike the names of ten employees of the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR), who exchanged the US for four defendants in Russian criminal cases of treason, they did not provide the names of the culprit with the failure of the SVR. “Kommersant” filled this gap by finding out who the traitor is and what the leadership of the SVR can wait for, where, as it turned out, he worked for a long time, supervising the work with illegal immigrants, whom he passed as a result. The investigation was conducted by Kommersant correspondents Vladimir Solovyev and Vladislav Triphon.

Unreal Colonel

"This is the result of betrayal, and traitors always end up badly. They end up, as a rule, either from drinking or from drugs - under the fence," - Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin commented on the biggest Russian-American spy scandal in history that erupted in June. The prime minister did not call the name of the traitor who revealed the Russian spy network to the Americans, although there is no reason to doubt that he knows it. Carefully hide the data about the main culprit of the loud exposure of illegal immigrants of the SVR and in the Russian special services: as soon as it comes to the spy scandal, the security officers are silent. And Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov asked the Kommersant question about who gave up the Russian intelligence officers to the Americans, spread his arms: “I don’t know anything about that.”
Any information about a person whom both Prime Minister Putin and President Dmitry Medvedev are called not only as a traitor, the authorities of the Russian Federation protect them with such care as if it’s not a traitor, but a valuable agent. Perhaps the culprit large-scale investigation, which, as found out by "Kommersant", began immediately after the failure of the SVR and has not ended to this day. A source who told about it to “Kommersant” reported that “a lot of former and current employees of the SVR” is taking place in the case, and recommended “not to go into this matter”.
Collecting data about a traitor was more like intelligence work, rather than a journalistic investigation. Officials who possessed at least some information about him flatly refused to talk on the phone, insisting only on personal meetings. 
During the correspondence with "Kommersant", they not once changed the addresses of their electronic mailboxes, deleting the letters related to this topic immediately after reading. “We know who he is and where he is. He betrayed either for money, or he was simply caught on something. 
But you can be sure that Mercader was already sent for him (Ramon Mercader - an agent of the Soviet special services who inflicted a mortal wound with an ice ax Leo Trotsky.– “Kommersant”), one of the high-ranking members of the Kremlin administration answered the question of “Kommersant” and added: - Fate such a person is unenviable. He will carry it all his life behind him and fear retribution every day."
“He”, as Kommersant found out, is Colonel Shcherbakov, who for a long time served in the SVR as the head of the US Department of Administration “C”, in charge of working with illegal migrants.
In the "forest" - as the SVR headquarters in Yasenevo is called in slang - they overlooked the fact that the daughter of Shcherbakov has long been living in the USA. “It's strange why no one was puzzled by the fact that a person in such a post has relatives abroad. This is just one of many questions in this case that the investigation is interested in,” the Chekist, familiar with the investigation, told “Kommersant.” they are also monitored in much less classified structures. For example, there is a case of dismissal from the Security Council of a person whose relative was only going to get married with a foreigner. In the SVR, this should be not just strict, but super-strong. "
The SVR did not suspect anything, even when Shcherbakov refused the promotion he was offered about a year before the spy scandal of promotion — apparently, in order to avoid the lie detector test required in such cases. This means that he was already actively cooperating with the American special services. In any case, in June, the US authorities reported that they began to monitor Russian illegals ten years ago.
Finally, no one paid attention to the fact that the son of Shcherbakov, who worked in another power department, the Federal Drug Control Service, hastily left Russia, having flown to America shortly before the exposure of Russian agents. The traitor himself, says an informed Kommersant source in the Russian state structures, fled the country just three days before Dmitry Medvedev’s June visit to the United States. “After that, the Americans, fearing that we, suspecting treachery, would start pulling out our illegal immigrants from the USA, began arresting them,” a source told Kommersant. Medvedev's visit to the States. "

Real general

After the sensational spy scandal, the surname Shcherbakov in the SVR was equated with a curse. And the point is not that the colonel surrendered his, but how he did it. According to Kommersant interlocutors in the Russian special services, he personally contributed to exposing the most valuable and experienced of ten Russian illegal immigrants, 65-year-old Mikhail Vasenkov, also known as Juan Lazaro.
Back in the 60s, Mr. Vasenkov-Lazaro was sent to Spain, from where he left for Chile, where under the guise of a photographer he began his work on foreign intelligence. "He takes great pictures - it’s impossible to imitate - and turned his talent into a cover for missions," the intelligence officer said. In search of nature under the guise of fashionable photographer Juan Lazaro traveled all over Latin America, simultaneously acquiring acquaintances among politicians and businessmen. Subsequently, his friends and acquaintances were used by the Soviet and then the Russian special services not only to obtain information, but also as agents of influence.
In the 70s, Mikhail Vasenkov married Peruvian journalist Vika Pelaez, and soon after, the newlyweds moved to the United States. It was an authorized relocation on the instructions of the leadership of foreign intelligence. And, apparently, Mrs. Pelaez really was not cunning when, after the arrest, she told the press that she did not know who her husband really was. In the States, the Lazaro family lived modestly, although the spouse of the Russian intelligence officer was an influential journalist from the Spanish-language newspaper El Diario, and among the acquaintances of Mikhail Vasenkov were high-ranking functionaries from the left wing of the US Democratic Party. For successful work on the Soviet special services, Mr. Vasenkov back in the 80s by the secret decree of the leadership of the USSR was awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union.
The possibilities and connections of the illegal Vasenkov are really impressive. According to one of his acquaintances, Vasenkov-Lazaro once managed to get the schedule of US foreign visits for several years ahead. During his stay abroad, he received three higher educations. Already in the United States, when he was over sixty, he acquired a degree in political science. “During his work, Vasenkov became so naturalized that he almost forgot the Russian language,” says the Kommersant source.
Shortly before his arrest, Mikhail Vasenkov was given the rank of general. At the same time, he was officially a pensioner for several years and formally could refuse to work for exploration. But he did not do this.
The biography of Vasenkov-Lazaro was so flawless that, even after arresting him, the American special services were powerless to prove the detainee’s connection with Russian intelligence. Before the investigators sat a gray-haired, respected family man, whose children, wife, numerous friends, fellow students, neighbors, and influential acquaintances were ready under oath to confirm any fact from the life of a respectable 65-year-old American Lazaro. The arrested himself, until recently, denied any accusations, insisting on innocence. Colleagues Mr. Vasenkova admit that in the end he could be free. If one day Colonel Shcherbakov did not appear in his cell.
The circumstances of this meeting, the interlocutors of "Kommersant" describe as follows: "The visitor in Russian called the arrested person his name and last name, rank, place of work, after which he said:" Mikhail Anatolyevich, you must confess and surrender. " In response, the arrested person told the guest in English that he did not understand the language in which he speaks. Then the visitor repeated everything in English. But in response I heard: “I’m Juan Lazaro. Everything that happens is a stupid mistake, and I don’t understand what I should confess.” After that, Colonel Shcherbakov handed over the Vasenkov-Lazaro case to the Americans, which he brought from Moscow. After the folder with the details laid before the suspect, he called his real name, adding that he did not intend to say anything more.
Investigators, however, nevertheless attempted to talk to an illegal alien, breaking three ribs and a leg during interrogation. With these fractures he flew to Russia after the exchange of uncovered spies for four defendants in Russian criminal cases of treason against their homeland, which took place in July. Colleagues of Mr. Vasenkov say that, barely returning, he told his leadership that he was not going to live in Russia and was going to go abroad. “It is understandable. After all, what happened is not just a betrayal,” they say in the SVR.
This never happened. "The only consolation in the SVR is that one of the Russian spies, a military communications officer, known as Robert Christopher Metsos, still managed to escape from the Americans in Cyprus." The man whose photo was in everyone’s hands the cops just melted away. “Nobody knows which route, through which ports and where it went,” the security services officers proudly say. “That's what a person means."

Debriefing

The spy scandal had almost no effect on the bilateral relations between Moscow and Washington. At least, on their political component. This happened mainly because both the Kremlin and the American White House were equally interested in minimizing the negative effect of this story as much as possible and not in spoiling the “reset”. "According to our data, when Obama was informed about the upcoming operation, he personally insisted that he not break the game with the Russians. Therefore, he did not give sanctions for the arrests before the visit of our president there, ”said a Kremlin official who was directly involved in negotiations with the US As a result, the network was covered immediately after the visit, which, in general, was also a moveton. But we have entered the position of Obama. It can be understood."
Although the arrest of Russians was painfully perceived by the Russian special services, Moscow sincerely rejoiced when, in exchange for the detained Russian illegal immigrants, the United States, among others, asked the former head of the military-technical and military-economic policy department of the Foreign Policy Research Department of the Institute of the USA and Canada RAS 2007 to 15 years of imprisonment for treason. “Bortnikov (the head of the FSB of the Russian Federation, Alexander Bortnikov. -“ Kommersant ”) was very happy about this. The Americans simply burned Sutyagin, and everyone learned that he was really a traitor,” says an employee of the administration, Mr. Medvedev.
In order not to anger Moscow once again, the Americans behaved uncharacteristically for such stories and refused to “shine” the traitor. “Previously, as it used to happen? Someone will run away from us - the Americans solemnly announce: Ivan Ivanovich is with us, he feels fine and does not need Russian consular assistance,” one of the current employees of the Russian special services recalls with Kommersant But this is not the case with Shcherbakov. The Americans at home are quietly happy that they have shod the Russians and have noted promotions. And we are clearing debris, conducting internal investigations and inspections."
However, in the Russian Foreign Ministry they say that the scandal only at first glance passed smoothly. “In the“ forest ”they are still so furious that, as far as they can, they torpedo any work with the Americans, even on such an important topic as missile defense,” a high-ranking Russian diplomat complains.
The investigation of the failure of the SVR, which is being conducted now with the participation of a number of Russian law enforcement agencies, including the FSB, is called unprecedented by the KGB. “This is a large batch, as a result of which both heads and epaulets will fly,” notes source Kommersant, who is familiar with the investigation. According to him, now the conversations that the SVR should be reformed and returned under the roof of the main intelligence service, from which intelligence was withdrawn by the decree of the first President of Russia Boris Yeltsin in the early 90s, have resumed. “The isolation of the SVR from the KGB is increasingly criticized. The head of the Security Council Nikolai Patrushev is an active supporter of the reverse process. Again, rumors about the change of Fradkov (the head of the SVR Mikhail Fradkov.–“ Kommersant ”) began to fall in love with Naryshkin (Kremlin’s head of administration Sergei Naryshkin.— "b") "," says the source "b".
Rumors about the imminent resignation of the head of the SVR, Mikhail Fradkov, appeared a year ago. But then everything worked out. However, after the June failure, no one undertakes to guarantee that Mr. Fradkov will sit in his chair. According to Kommersant’s information, Dmitry Medvedev, convinced that the arrest of illegal immigrants is the result of betrayal, not an intelligence error, nevertheless said at one of the closed meetings that personnel decisions on the SVR would be taken. “Failure is a reason to think,” the source quoted Kommersant in his circle.
However, the Kremlin does not disclose its plans for the future fate of the SVR. Moreover, in October, the Kremlin’s press service announced that the failed spies had been awarded “the highest state awards”. The decision to mark the work of declassified intelligence officers in this way was taken personally by Mr. Medvedev, since he considers them to be "talented adventurers." According to Kommersant’s information, some of the exposed spies, and possibly all of them, received the Order of Courage from the hands of the President. In the description of this award it is said that it is honored by those who have shown "dedication, courage and bravery in the performance of military, civil or official duty in conditions involving a risk to life."
