Mar 17, 2017
Laptop containing Trump Tower floor plans stolen from Secret Service vehicle
washingtonexaminer.com/laptop-containing-trump-tower-floor-plans-stolen-from-secret-service-vehicle

A laptop containing floor plans to Trump Tower and information regarding the investigation into former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's private email server was stolen from a Secret Service agent in New York, the Secret Service confirmed.
The Secret Service confirmed a laptop was taken in a criminal incident in New York, but it did not contain classified information.
"Secret Service issued laptops contain multiple layers of security including full disk encryption and are not permitted to contain classified information," the agency said in a statement. "An investigation is ongoing and the Secret Service is withholding additional comment until the facts are gathered. The Secret Service requests anyone with information regarding this crime to please contact the New York Police Department and the U.S. Secret Service New York Field Office."
The New York Daily News reported NYPD sources said the laptop was stolen from the car of a Secret Service agent in Brooklyn Thursday morning. The laptop is still missing, but some items associated with the agent — such as a bag and some coins — have since been recovered.
According to the report, the laptop had digital floor plans for Trump Tower, evacuation protocols and information regarding the Clinton investigation stored on it. Nothing about the White House was stored on the computer, but there was other information that could compromise national security, police sources told the Daily News.
The agent's keycard and "sensitive" documents were also stolen from the agent's vehicle.
NBC News reported the laptop could be wiped remotely and it is encrypted.
A thief reportedly got out of a vehicle in Brooklyn and stole the laptop from the agent's vehicle, which was reportedly parked in the driveway of her home.
It's the second embarrassing report from New York for the Secret Service recently, after two agents were reportedly summoned to Washington to answer allegations that they took selfies with President Trump's grandson while the 8-year-old boy was sleeping.
