Mar 18, 2017
Frantic search for Secret Service agent's laptop stolen from her parked car which contains Trump Tower floor plans and Clinton email details
dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4324702/Frantic-search-Secret-Servi.html

The Secret Service is frantically searching for an agent's laptop, after it was stolen from inside her parked car in Brooklyn, New York Thursday morning. 
NYPD sources, who are aiding in the search, told multiple outlets that the missing laptop has 'sensitive' information on it which could compromise national security - including Trump Tower floor plans as well as documents on Hillary Clinton's email scandal and Pope Francis.
'There's data on there that's highly sensitive,' one police source told the New York Daily News. 'They're scrambling like mad.'
The laptop was stolen Thursday morning from inside the agent's car, parked in her driveway in the Bath Beach neighborhood. It's unclear whether the car was locked or not. 
Surveillance footage reportedly shows the thief get out of a car, possibly an Uber, near the home. He is later seen walking away from the scene with a backpack.
In addition to the laptop, the thief stole some coins and a black bag with the Secret Service insignia on it - which were later recovered. 
But there's still no sign of the missing laptop, the agent's access keycard and other 'sensitive' documents.
The agent has not been identified, and it's unclear what level her security clearance is.
This is just the second scandal this week for the Secret Service, which has been the center of several mishaps in recent years. 
On Thursday, it was revealed that two Secret Service officers are being investigated for allegedly taking a picture with President Trump's grandson, Donald Trump III, while the eight-year-old was sleeping.
The alleged incident took place last weekend while the agents were driving the boy from the family estate in Westchester, New York, back into Manhattan, Mother Jones reported. 
Trump III, the son of President Trump's eldest son Donald Trump Jr and his wife Vanessa, woke up as the agents were snapping selfies and was 'freaked out'.
The youngster told his mom about the alleged incident as soon as he got home, and she then reported it to his father.
It was quickly being discussed by those at the very top of the Secret Service, and the two agents in question have since been summoned to the Secret Service Office of Professional Responsibility in DC.
The agency released a statement about the incident on Wednesday.
'The US Secret Service is aware of a matter involving two of our agents and one of our protectees,' a spokesman said.
'Our Office of Professional Responsibility will always thoroughly review a matter to determine the facts and to ensure proper, long-standing protocols and procedures are followed.
'The Secret Service would caution individuals to not jump to conclusions that may grossly mischaracterize the matter.'
It has been a tumultuous few years for the Secret Service, an agency entrusted with protecting the president, the president's family and visiting foreign dignitaries. 
The agency's ability to their job came into question in 2012, when it was revealed that agents hired prostitutes on a trip to Cartagena, Colombia, where  President Obama attended the 6th Summit of the Americas.
Nine employees resigned in response to the scandal, and a new director, Julia Pierson, was appointed a year later to fix the agency's image issue. 
Pierson, the agency's first female director, was only in office for a little more than a year  before the Secret Service  came under fire again in September 2014 - this time for two high-profile intrusions at the White House. 
Also that month, it was revealed that agents mistakenly let an armed security guard at the CDC ride in the same elevator as the president, while he was visiting the center to discuss the Ebola outbreak. 
Pierson resigned from the position a month later, after she was forced to testify about the agency's gaffs before Congress. 
Obama appointee Joseph Clancy took over the role but retired on March 4 of this year. For the past two weeks, his deputy William J. Callahan has been acting director. 
