Mar 17, 2017
Secret Service Agent’s Laptop Stolen In Brooklyn
newyork.cbslocal.com/2017/03/17/secret-service-agent-laptop-stolen/

An unoccupied vehicle with Maryland plates was broken into and a bag with a laptop and other items belonging to a Secret Service agent was stolen, sources told CBS2.
The break-in happened in the driveway of the agent’s home in Bath Beach, Brooklyn, sources said.
The laptop contains sensitive information, including Trump Tower floor plans and evacuation protocol as well as information pertaining to Hillary Clinton’s campaign email investigation, sources told CBS2.
There is not believed to be any sensitive information related to the White House on the laptop, sources told CBS2.
Other sensitive documents that were in the car were also taken, but it’s unclear what those documents are, sources told CBS2. The information on the laptop cannot be remotely erased, sources said.
“The U.S. Secret Service can confirm that an employee was the victim of a criminal act in which our Agency issued laptop computer was stolen,” the agency said in a statement Friday. “Secret Service issued laptops contain multiple layers of security including full disk encryption and are not permitted to contain classified information. An investigation is ongoing and the Secret Service is withholding additional comment until the facts are gathered.”
It is unclear if the theft was random of if the agent was targeted.
Surveillance video possibly from the street shows a white man wearing dark clothing exit the back passenger side of what may be a Chevrolet Malibu after pulling up to the secret service agent’s street.
The car then pulls up to victim’s house and stops with its hazard lights on. The man then exits from the back passenger side, sources said. Video does not show the actual break-in.
The same individual is later seen carrying the agent’s bag walking on Bay 10th Street and Cropsey Avenue, sources said. Besides the laptop, “lapel assignment pins” which included Trump, Clinton Campaign, UNGA and Pope pins were in the bag, sources said.
The NYPD recovered the zippered bag — black with a Secret Service insignia on it — at 1533 Cropsey Ave., sources said. Video from the area of that address shows the suspect throwing the bag onto snow in front of the location and walking past it.
Inside the recovered bag was a collection of coins and other items, but no laptop, sources told CBS2.   The recovered items are being tested in a lab.
The laptop has not been recovered. The stolen computer is considered a compromise of national security, CBS News reported.
Mike Mignuolo, who lives next door, told CBS2’s Valerie Castro, he was questioned by police about the incident.
“It’s a little bit exciting, something mysterious,” he said.
Another neighbor said that around 3 a.m. Thursday she was out on her balcony and saw a man walking down the street with a bag over his shoulder.
Investigators had neighbors wondering what had happened.
“I got so scared that I says, ‘My gosh, somebody got killed to watch so many policemen here,'” said Mary Pyryt.
Neighbors told CBS2 they don’t the agent and her family all that well. They just moved into the neighborhood sometime last  year.
