Jun 18, 2018
Statement of Michael E. Horowitz
https://oig.justice.gov/testimony/t180618.pdf

Mr. Chairman, Senator Feinstein, and Members of the Committee:

Thank you for inviting me to testify at today’s hearing to examine the Office
of the Inspector General’s (OIG) findings in our “Review of Various Actions by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and Department of Justice in Advance of the 2016
Election.” The report reviews various actions by the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) and Department of Justice (Department) in connection with the investigation
into the use of a private email server by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
(named the Midyear investigation by the FBI).

The 500-plus page report was the product of 17 months of investigative work
by a dedicated OIG team that reviewed well over 1.2 million documents, including
over 100,000 text and instant messages, and interviewed more than 100
witnesses, many on multiple occasions. Our report provides a thorough,
comprehensive, and objective recitation of the facts related to the Department’s
handling of the Midyear investigation. The review team followed the evidence
wherever it led, and it was through their efforts that we identified the inappropriate
text and instant messages discussed in the report. Additionally, as a result of the
OIG’s painstaking forensic examinations, we recovered thousands of text messages
that otherwise would have been lost or undisclosed. We completed our report when
we were satisfied that we had pursued all reasonable investigative leads and
finished our detailed forensic examinations. As a result of this approach, our report
includes, for example, text messages that we recovered just last month, which
were significant to our findings. It also includes an analysis of the FBI’s decision
not to request access in May 2016 to certain classified information, a decision that
we did not learn of until the later stages of our review.

As detailed in our report, we found that the inappropriate political messages
cast a cloud over the Midyear investigation, sowed doubt about the credibility of the
FBI’s handling of it, and impacted the reputation of the FBI. Moreover, we found
the implication that senior FBI employees would be willing to take official action to
impact a presidential candidate’s electoral prospects to be deeply troubling and
antithetical to the core values of the FBI and the Department of Justice.

Our review also included a fact-based, detailed assessment of certain specific
investigative and prosecutorial decisions that were the subject of controversy. It
was necessary to select particular investigative decisions for focused attention
because it would not have been possible to recreate and analyze every decision
made in a year-long investigation. In examining the decisions we selected for
review, the question we considered was not whether a particular decision was the
ideal or most effective choice, but rather, whether the documentary and testimonial
evidence indicated that the decision was based on improper considerations,
including political bias. This approach is consistent with the OIG’s handling of such
questions in past reviews with respect to assessing discretionary judgment calls,
and recognizes and respects the institutional oversight role of the OIG. Our report
provides a comprehensive assessment of these decisions and of the Midyear 
investigation, and details the factual evidence, so that the public, Congress, and
other stakeholders can conduct their own assessment of them.

Within this framework, as to the specific investigative and prosecutorial
decisions we reviewed, we did not find documentary or testimonial evidence that
improper considerations, including political bias, directly affected those specific
investigative decisions, in part because the decisions were made by the larger
Midyear team or the prosecutors. This determination by the OIG does not mean
that we necessarily endorse the decisions or conclude they were the most effective
among the options considered, or that our finding should or can be extrapolated to
cover other decisions made during the course of the investigation by FBI employees
who sent inappropriate political messages. With regard to the decision to close the
investigation without prosecution, we found no evidence that the conclusions by the
prosecutors were the result of improper considerations, including political bias, but
rather were based on the prosecutors’ assessment of the facts, the law, and past
Department practice. 

Conversely, we found that the FBI’s explanations for its failure to take
immediate action after discovering the Weiner laptop in October 2016 to be
unpersuasive, and we did not have confidence that the decision of Deputy Assistant
Director Peter Strzok to prioritize the Russia investigation over following up on the
Weiner laptop was free from bias..

We also found that, in key moments, then FBI Director James Comey clearly
departed from FBI and Department norms, and his decisions negatively impacted
the perception of the FBI and the Department as fair administrators of justice.
Director Comey concealed from the Attorney General and the Deputy Attorney
General his intention to make a unilateral announcement in July about the reasons
for his recommendation not to prosecute former Secretary Clinton. His July 5
statement included inappropriate commentary about uncharged conduct,
announced his views on what a “reasonable prosecutor” would do, and served to
confuse rather than clarify public understanding of his recommendation. In late
October, he again acted without adequately consulting Department leadership –
and contrary to important Department norms – when he sent a letter to Congress
announcing renewed investigative activity days before the election.

There are many lessons to be learned from the Department’s and the FBI’s
handling of the Midyear investigation. But among the most important is the need
to respect the institution’s hierarchy and structure, and to follow established
policies, procedures, and norms even in the highest-profile and most challenging
investigations. No rule, policy, or practice is perfect, of course. But at the same
time, neither is any individual’s ability to make judgments under pressure or in
what may seem like unique circumstances. When leaders and officials adhere to
their bedrock principles and values, the public has greater confidence in the fairness
and rightness of their decisions, and those institutions’ leaders better protect the
interests of federal law enforcement and the dedicated professionals who serve us
all. By contrast, the public’s trust is negatively impacted when law enforcement
officials make statements reflecting bias, when leaders abandon institutional norms 
and the organizational hierarchy in favor of their own ad hoc judgments, and when
leadership of the Department and the FBI are unable to speak directly with one
another for the good of the institutions. Our report makes nine recommendations
to assist the FBI and the Department in addressing these issues, most of which can
be tied together through a common theme – that the FBI and the Department
remain true to their foundational principles and values in all of their work.

The following summary is mostly taken from the Executive Summary of the OIG
report. 

Conduct of the Midyear Investigation

The FBI and Department referred to the investigation of Secretary Clinton’s
emails as “Midyear Exam” or “Midyear.” The Midyear investigation was opened by
the FBI in July 2015 based on a referral from the Office of the Intelligence
Community Inspector General (IC IG). The investigation was staffed by
prosecutors from the Department’s National Security Division (NSD) and the U.S.
Attorney’s Office for the Eastern District of Virginia (EDVA), and agents and
analysts selected primarily from the FBI’s Washington Field Office to work at FBI
Headquarters.

The Midyear investigation focused on whether Clinton intended to transmit
classified information on unclassified systems, knew that information included in
unmarked emails was classified, or later became aware that information was
classified and failed to report it. The Midyear team employed an investigative
strategy that included three primary lines of inquiry: collection and examination of
emails that traversed Clinton’s servers and other relevant evidence, interviews of
relevant witnesses, and analysis of whether classified information was compromised
by hostile cyber intrusions.

As described in Chapter Five of our report, we selected for examination
particular investigative decisions that were the subject of public or internal
controversy. These included the following:

  • The preference for consent over compulsory process to obtain evidence;
  • Decisions not to obtain or seek to review certain evidence, such as the
    personal devices used by former Secretary Clinton’s senior aides;
  • The use of voluntary witness interviews;
  • Decisions to enter into “letter use” or “Queen for a Day” immunity
    agreements with three witnesses;
  • The use of consent agreements and “act of production” immunity to obtain
    the laptops used by Clinton’s attorneys (Cheryl Mills and Heather Samuelson)
    to “cull” her personal and work-related emails; and
  • The handling of Clinton’s interview on July 2, 2016.
  
With regard to these investigative decisions, we found, as detailed in Chapter
Five, that the Midyear team:

  • Sought to obtain evidence whenever possible through consent but also used
    compulsory process, including grand jury subpoenas, search warrants, and
    2703(d) orders (court orders for non-content email information) to obtain
    various evidence. We found that the prosecutors provided justifications for
    the preference for consent that were supported by Department and FBI
    policy and practice;
  • Conducted voluntary witness interviews to obtain testimony, including from
    Clinton and her senior aides, and did not require any witnesses to testify
    before the grand jury. We found that one of the reasons for not using the
    grand jury for testimony involved concerns about exposing grand jurors to
    classified information;
  • Did not seek to obtain every device, including those of Clinton’s senior aides,
    or the contents of every email account through which a classified email may
    have traversed. We found that the reasons for not doing so were based on
    limitations the Midyear team imposed on the investigation’s scope, the desire
    to complete the investigation well before the election, and the belief that the
    foregone evidence was likely of limited value. We further found that those
    reasons were, in part, in tension with Comey’s response in October 2016 to
    the discovery of Clinton emails on the laptop of Anthony Weiner, the husband
    of Clinton’s former Deputy Chief of Staff and personal assistant, Huma
    Abedin;
  • Considered but did not seek permission from the Department to review
    certain highly classified materials that may have included information
    potentially relevant to the Midyear investigation. The classified appendix to
    this report describes in more detail the highly classified information, its
    potential relevance to the Midyear investigation, the FBI’s reasons for not
    seeking access to it, and our analysis;
  • Granted letter use immunity and/or “Queen for a Day” immunity to three
    witnesses in exchange for their testimony after considering, as provided for
    in Department policy, the value of the witness’s testimony, the witness’s
    relative culpability, and the possibility of a successful prosecution;
  • Used consent agreements and “act of production” immunity to obtain the
    culling laptops used by Mills and Samuelson, in part to avoid the uncertainty
    and delays of a potential motion to quash any subpoenas or search warrants. 
    We found that these decisions were occurring at a time when Comey and the
    Midyear team had already concluded that there was likely no prosecutable
    case and believed it was unlikely the culling laptops would change the
    outcome of the investigation;
  • Asked Clinton what appeared to be appropriate questions and made use of
    documents to challenge Clinton’s testimony and assess her credibility during
    her interview. We found that, by the date of her interview, the Midyear team
    and Comey had concluded that the evidence did not support criminal charges
    (absent a confession or false statement by Clinton during the interview), and
    that the interview had little effect on the outcome of the investigation; and
  • Allowed Mills and Samuelson to attend the Clinton interview as Clinton’s
    counsel, even though they also were fact witnesses, because the Midyear
    team determined that the only way to exclude them was to subpoena Clinton
    to testify before the grand jury, an option that we found was not seriously
    considered. We found no persuasive evidence that Mills’s or Samuelson’s
    presence influenced Clinton’s interview. Nevertheless, we found the decision
    to allow them to attend the interview was inconsistent with typical
    investigative strategy.
    
For each of these decisions, we analyzed whether there was evidence of
improper considerations, including bias, and also whether the justifications offered
for the decision were a pretext for improper, but unstated, considerations.

The question we considered was not whether a particular investigative
decision was the ideal choice or one that could have been handled more effectively,
but whether the circumstances surrounding the decision indicated that it was based
on considerations other than the merits of the investigation. If a choice made by
the investigative team was among two or more reasonable alternatives, we did not
find that it was improper even if we believed that an alternative decision would
have been more effective.

Thus, a determination by the OIG that a decision was not unreasonable does
not mean that the OIG has endorsed the decision or concluded that the decision
was the most effective among the options considered. We took this approach
because our role as an OIG is not to second-guess valid discretionary judgments
made during the course of an investigation, and this approach is consistent with the
OIG’s handling of such questions in past reviews.

In undertaking our analysis, our task was made significantly more difficult
because of text and instant messages exchanged on FBI devices and systems by
five FBI employees involved in the Midyear investigation. These messages reflected
political opinions in support of former Secretary Clinton and against her then
political opponent, Donald Trump. Some of these text messages and instant
messages mixed political commentary with discussions about the Midyear
investigation, and raised concerns that political bias may have impacted
investigative decisions.

In particular, we were concerned about text messages exchanged by FBI
Deputy Assistant Director Peter Strzok and Lisa Page, Special Counsel to the
Deputy Director, that potentially indicated or created the appearance that
investigative decisions were impacted by bias or improper considerations. As we
describe in Chapter Twelve of our report, most of the text messages raising such
questions pertained to the Russia investigation, which was not a part of this review.
Nonetheless, the suggestion in certain Russia-related text messages in August 2016
that Strzok might be willing to take official action to impact presidential candidate
Trump’s electoral prospects caused us to question the earlier Midyear investigative
decisions in which Strzok was involved, and whether he took specific actions in the
Midyear investigation based on his political views. As we describe in Chapter Five
of our report, we found that Strzok was not the sole decisionmaker for any of the
specific Midyear investigative decisions we examined in that chapter. We further
found evidence that in some instances Strzok and Page advocated for more
aggressive investigative measures in the Midyear investigation, such as the use of
grand jury subpoenas and search warrants to obtain evidence.

There were clearly tensions and disagreements in a number of important
areas between Midyear agents and prosecutors. However, we did not find
documentary or testimonial evidence that improper considerations, including
political bias, directly affected the specific investigative decisions we reviewed in
Chapter Five, or that the justifications offered for these decisions were pretextual.

Nonetheless, these messages cast a cloud over the FBI’s handling of the
Midyear investigation and the investigation’s credibility. But our review did not find
evidence to connect the political views expressed in these messages to the specific
investigative decisions that we reviewed; rather, consistent with the analytic
approach described above, we found that these specific decisions were the result of
discretionary judgments made during the course of an investigation by the Midyear
agents and prosecutors and that these judgment calls were not unreasonable. The
broader impact of these text and instant messages, including on such matters as
the public perception of the FBI and the Midyear investigation, are discussed in
Chapter Twelve of our report.

Comey’s Public Statement on July 5, 2016

“Endgame” Discussions

As we describe in Chapter Six of the report, by the Spring of 2016, Comey
and the Midyear team had determined that, absent an unexpected development,
evidence to support a criminal prosecution of Clinton was lacking. Midyear team
members told us that they based this assessment on a lack of evidence showing
intent to place classified information on the server, or knowledge that the
information was classified. We describe the factors that the Department took into
account in its decision to decline prosecution in Chapter Seven of our report and
below.

Comey told the OIG that as he began to realize the investigation was likely to
result in a declination, he began to think of ways to credibly announce its closing.
Comey engaged then DAG Yates in discussions in April 2016 about the “endgame”
for the Midyear investigation. Comey said that he encouraged Yates to consider the
most transparent options for announcing a declination. Yates told the OIG that, as
a result of her discussions with Comey, she thought the Department and FBI would
jointly announce any declination.

Comey said he also told Yates that the closer they got to the political
conventions, the more likely he would be to insist that a special counsel be
appointed, because he did not believe the Department could credibly announce the
closing of the investigation once Clinton was the Democratic Party nominee.
However, we did not find evidence that Comey ever seriously considered requesting
a special counsel; instead, he used the reference to a special counsel as an effort to
induce the Department to move more quickly to obtain the Mills and Samuelson
culling laptops and to complete the investigation.

Although Comey engaged with the Department in these “endgame”
discussions, he told us that he was concerned that involvement by then AG Loretta
Lynch in a declination announcement would result in “corrosive doubt” about
whether the decision was objective and impartial because Lynch was appointed by a
President from the same political party as Clinton. Comey cited other factors to us
that he said caused him to be concerned by early May 2016 that Lynch could not
credibly participate in announcing a declination:

  • An alleged instruction from Lynch at a meeting in September 2015 to call the
    Midyear investigation a “matter” in statements to the media and Congress,
    which we describe in Chapter Four of our report;
  • Statements made by then President Barack Obama about the Midyear
    investigation, which also are discussed in Chapter Four; and
  • Concerns that certain classified information mentioning Lynch would leak,
    which we describe in Chapter Six and in the classified appendix.
    
As we discuss below and in Chapter Six of our report, the meeting between
Lynch and former President Clinton on June 27, 2016 also played a role in Comey’s
decision to deliver a unilateral statement.

Comey did not raise any of these concerns with Lynch or Yates. Rather,
unbeknownst to them, Comey began considering the possibility of an FBI-only
public statement in late April and early May 2016. Comey told the OIG that a
separate public statement was warranted by the “500-year flood” in which the FBI
found itself, and that he weighed the need to preserve the credibility and integrity
of the Department and the FBI, and the need to protect “a sense of justice more
broadly in the country—that things are fair not fixed, and they’re done
independently.”

Comey’s Draft Statement

Comey’s initial draft statement, which he shared with FBI senior leadership
on May 2, criticized Clinton’s handling of classified information as “grossly
negligent,” but concluded that “no reasonable prosecutor” would bring a case based
on the facts developed in the Midyear investigation. Over the course of the next 2
months, Comey’s draft statement underwent various language changes, including
the following:

  • The description of Clinton’s handling of classified information was changed
    from “grossly negligent” to “extremely careless;”
  • A statement that the sheer volume of information classified as Secret
    supported an inference of gross negligence was removed and replaced with a
    statement that the classified information they discovered was “especially
    concerning because all of these emails were housed on servers not supported
    by full-time staff”;
  • A statement that the FBI assessed that it was “reasonably likely” that hostile
    actors gained access to Clinton’s private email server was changed to
    “possible.” The statement also acknowledged that the FBI investigation and
    its forensic analysis did not find evidence that Clinton’s email server systems
    were compromised; and
  • A paragraph summarizing the factors that led the FBI to assess that it was
    possible that hostile actors accessed Clinton’s server was added, and at one
    point referenced Clinton’s use of her private email for an exchange with then
    President Obama while in the territory of a foreign adversary. This reference
    later was changed to “another senior government official,” and ultimately
    was omitted.
    
Each version of the statement criticized Clinton’s handling of classified
information. Comey told us that he included criticism of former Secretary Clinton’s
uncharged conduct because “unusual transparency…was necessary for an
unprecedented situation,” and that such transparency “was the best chance we had
of having the American people have confidence that the justice system works[.]”

Other witnesses told the OIG that Comey included this criticism to avoid
creating the appearance that the FBI was “letting [Clinton] off the hook,” as well as
to “messag[e]” the decision to the FBI workforce to emphasize that employees
would be disciplined for similar conduct and to distinguish the Clinton investigation
from the cases of other public figures who had been prosecuted for mishandling
violations.

The Tarmac Meeting and Impact on Comey’s Statement

On June 27, 2016, Lynch met with former President Clinton on Lynch’s plane,
which was parked on the tarmac at a Phoenix airport. This meeting was unplanned, 
and Lynch’s staff told the OIG they received no notice that former President Clinton
planned to board Lynch’s plane. Both Lynch and former President Clinton told the
OIG that they did not discuss the Midyear investigation or any other Department
investigation during their conversation. Chapter Six of our report describes their
testimony about the substance of their discussion.

Lynch told the OIG that she became increasingly concerned as the meeting
“went on and on,” and stated “that it was just too long a conversation to have had.”
Following this meeting, Lynch obtained an ethics opinion from the Departmental
Ethics Office that she was not required to recuse herself from the Midyear
investigation, and she decided not to voluntarily recuse herself either. In making
this decision, Lynch told the OIG that stepping aside would create a misimpression
that she and former President Clinton had discussed inappropriate topics, or that
her role in the Midyear investigation somehow was greater than it was.

On July 1, during an interview with a reporter, Lynch stated that she was not
recusing from the Midyear investigation, but that she ”fully expect[ed]” to accept
the recommendation of the career agents and prosecutors who conducted the
investigation, “as is the common process.” Then, in a follow up question, Lynch
said “I’ll be briefed on [the findings] and I will be accepting their
recommendations.” Lynch’s statements created considerable public confusion
about the status of her continuing involvement in the Midyear investigation.

Although we found no evidence that Lynch and former President Clinton
discussed the Midyear investigation or engaged in other inappropriate discussion
during their tarmac meeting, we also found that Lynch’s failure to recognize the
appearance problem created by former President Clinton’s visit and to take action
to cut the visit short was an error in judgment. We further concluded that her
efforts to respond to the meeting by explaining what her role would be in the
investigation going forward created public confusion and did not adequately address
the situation.

Comey told the OIG that he was “90 percent there, like highly likely” to make
a separate public statement prior to the tarmac meeting, but that the tarmac
meeting “tipped the scales” toward making his mind up to go forward with his own
public statement.

Comey’s Decision Not to Tell Department Leadership

Comey acknowledged that he made a conscious decision not to tell
Department leadership about his plans to make a separate statement because he
was concerned that they would instruct him not to do it. He also acknowledged
that he made this decision when he first conceived of the idea to do the statement,
even as he continued to engage the Department in discussions about the
“endgame” for the investigation.

Comey admitted that he concealed his intentions from the Department until
the morning of his press conference on July 5, and instructed his staff to do the 
same, to make it impracticable for Department leadership to prevent him from
delivering his statement. We found that it was extraordinary and insubordinate for
Comey to do so, and we found none of his reasons to be a persuasive basis for
deviating from well-established Department policies in a way intentionally designed
to avoid supervision by Department leadership over his actions.

On the morning of July 5, 2016, Comey contacted Lynch and Yates about his
plans to make a public statement, but did so only after the FBI had notified the
press—in fact, the Department first learned about Comey’s press conference from a
media inquiry, rather than from the FBI. When Comey did call Lynch that morning,
he told her that he was not going to inform her about the substance of his planned
press statement.

While Lynch asked Comey what the subject matter of the statement was
going to be (Comey told her in response it would be about the Midyear
investigation), she did not ask him to tell her what he intended to say about the
Midyear investigation. We found that Lynch, having decided not to recuse herself,
retained authority over both the final prosecution decision and the Department’s
management of the Midyear investigation. As such, we believe she should have
instructed Comey to tell her what he intended to say beforehand, and should have
discussed it with Comey.

Comey’s public statement announced that the FBI had completed its Midyear
investigation, criticized Clinton and her senior aides as “extremely careless” in their
handling of classified information, stated that the FBI was recommending that the
Department decline prosecution of Clinton, and asserted that “no reasonable
prosecutor” would prosecute Clinton based on the facts developed by the FBI during
its investigation. We determined that Comey’s decision to make this statement was
the result of his belief that only he had the ability to credibly and authoritatively
convey the rationale for the decision to not seek charges against Clinton, and that
he needed to hold the press conference to protect the FBI and the Department from
the extraordinary harm that he believed would have resulted had he failed to do so.
While we found no evidence that Comey’s statement was the result of bias or an
effort to influence the election, we did not find his justifications for issuing the
statement to be reasonable or persuasive.

We concluded that Comey’s unilateral announcement was inconsistent with
Department policy and violated long-standing Department practice and protocol by,
among other things, criticizing Clinton’s uncharged conduct. We also found that
Comey usurped the authority of the Attorney General, and inadequately and
incompletely described the legal position of Department prosecutors. 

The Department’s Declination Decision on July 6

Following Comey’s public statement on July 5, the Midyear prosecutors
finalized their recommendation that the Department decline prosecution of Clinton,
her senior aides, and the senders of emails determined to contain classified
information. On July 6, the Midyear prosecutors briefed Lynch, Yates, Comey,
other members of Department and FBI leadership, and FBI Midyear team members
about the basis for the declination recommendation. Lynch subsequently issued a
short public statement that she met with the career prosecutors and agents who
conducted the investigation and “received and accepted their unanimous
recommendation” that the investigation be closed without charges.
We found that the prosecutors considered five federal statutes:

  • 18 U.S.C. §§ 793(d) and (e) (willful mishandling of documents or information
    relating to the national defense);
  • 18 U.S.C. § 793(f) (removal, loss, theft, abstraction, or destruction of
    documents or information relating to the national defense through gross
    negligence, or failure to report such removal, loss, theft, abstraction, or
    destruction);
  • 18 U.S.C. § 1924 (unauthorized removal and retention of classified
    documents or material by government employees); and
  • 18 U.S.C. § 2071 (concealment, removal, or mutilation of government
    records).
    
As described in Chapter Seven of our report, the prosecutors concluded that
the evidence did not support prosecution under any of these statutes for various
reasons, including that former Secretary Clinton and her senior aides lacked the
intent to communicate classified information on unclassified systems. Critical to
their conclusion was that the emails in question lacked proper classification
markings, that the senders often refrained from using specific classified facts or
terms in emails and worded emails carefully in an attempt to “talk around”
classified information, that the emails were sent to other government officials in
furtherance of their official duties, and that former Secretary Clinton relied on the
judgment of State Department employees to properly handle classified information,
among other facts.

We further found that the statute that required the most complex analysis by
the prosecutors was Section 793(f)(1), the “gross negligence” provision that has
been the focus of much of the criticism of the declination decision. As we describe
in Chapters Two and Seven of our report, the prosecutors analyzed the legislative
history of Section 793(f)(1), relevant case law, and the Department’s prior
interpretation of the statute. They concluded that Section 793(f)(1) likely required
a state of mind that was “so gross as to almost suggest deliberate intention,”
criminally reckless, or “something that falls just short of being willful,” as well as
evidence that the individuals who sent emails containing classified information
“knowingly” included or transferred such information onto unclassified systems.

The Midyear team concluded that such proof was lacking. We found that this
interpretation of Section 793(f)(1) was consistent with the Department’s historical
approach in prior cases under different leadership, including in the 2008 decision
not to prosecute former Attorney General Alberto Gonzales for mishandling
classified documents.

We analyzed the Department’s declination decision according to the same
analytical standard that we applied to other decisions made during the
investigation. We did not substitute the OIG’s judgment for the judgments made
by the Department, but rather sought to determine whether the decision was based
on improper considerations, including political bias. We found no evidence that the
conclusions by the prosecutors were affected by bias or other improper
considerations; rather, we determined that they were based on the prosecutors’
assessment of the facts, the law, and past Department practice.

We therefore concluded that these were legal and policy judgments involving
core prosecutorial discretion that were for the Department to make.

Discovery in September 2016 of Emails on the Weiner Laptop

Discovery of Emails by the FBI’s New York Field Office

In September 2016, the FBI’s New York Field Office (NYO) and the U.S.
Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York (SDNY) began investigating
former Congressman Anthony Weiner for his online relationship with a minor. A
federal search warrant was obtained on September 26, 2016, for Weiner’s iPhone,
iPad, and laptop computer. The FBI obtained these devices the same day. The
search warrant authorized the government to search for evidence relating to the
following crimes: transmitting obscene material to a minor, sexual exploitation of
children, and activities related to child pornography.

The Weiner case agent told the OIG that he began processing Weiner’s
devices on September 26, and that he noticed “within hours” that there were “over
300,000 emails on the laptop.” He said that either that evening or the next
morning, he saw at least one BlackBerry PIN message between Clinton and Abedin,
as well as emails between them. He said that he recalled seeing emails associated
with “about seven domains,” such as yahoo.com, state.gov, clintonfoundation.org,
clintonemail.com, and hillaryclinton.com. The case agent immediately notified his
NYO chain of command, and the information was ultimately briefed to NYO
Assistant Director in Charge (ADIC) William Sweeney on September 28.

Reporting of Emails to FBI Headquarters

As we describe in Chapter Nine of our report, Sweeney took the following
steps to notify FBI Headquarters about the discovery of Midyear-related emails on
the Weiner laptop:

  
