Chapter 5: The IOC

Do not tell your mother!

August 27, 2005 
Solntzevo police station

By his third day in solitary confinement, there was no part of Gennady’s body that didn’t ache from the kicks and beatings, with thick-soled military boots being the weapon of choice. Lying on the stone floor of his cell, curled in the fetal position in his thoroughly blood-soaked FBI sweatshirt, he was certain his left knee was broken. He felt a gash in his forehead and, in his dizzy exhaustion, remembered that this one was not new; it was from the 1988 beating he had endured from his comrades in Havana. Could the bastards have drilled a second divot into his skull?
Gennady had yet to be given a glass of water, let alone any food, and had lost all sense of time, but it was still dark when a jailer proffered a metal can of water through a portal in the cell’s bars. Struggling to sit up, Gennady took and quickly spit out the vile liquid.
“What, you don’t like piss?” The guard chuckled as he walked away. 
Before the jailer disappeared down the hallway, an FSB thug carrying a tray full of food took his place. The jailer returned to let him into Gennady’s cell and provided the agent with a chair. Instead of offering any to Gennady, the agent slowly teased him by eating the eggs and toast himself, quaffing it down with a large glass of juice. Gennady begged him for something to drink.
“Oh, I’m sorry. How rude of me,” replied the FSB man. “Ivan,” he called to the jailer, who appeared with another full tray, setting it just outside the cell bars.
“I just have a couple of questions before we dine together.” The man smiled, then placed his tray on the floor, out of reach of Gennady’s arm (his other injured in his arrest), and pulled a thick leather whip off his belt. “Don’t worry, it’s the soft one,” he said as he unleashed a flurry of strikes.
“When did you introduce Chris to Motorin?” Crack. 
“To Martynov?” Crack. 
“Your food’s getting cold, traitor Vasilenko.” The heel of a hurled boot hit him in the lip.
“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” Gennady barely uttered. “It was all a coincidence. You’ve got to believe me.”
“So just how does a man with no pension afford a dacha in the country? Was it FBI money? CIA money? How much?”
Crack. 
“I never took their money! I swear it on my children’s lives!”

October 1980

Upon his return to Washington, Gennady gifted Yakushkin with a UCLA baseball cap. The token, meant to make the stern rezident smile, was immediately tossed in the trash without comment. Within days, Gennady found that his sundry duties now included socializing in a veritable DC institution. Harry Truman, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson, and Richard Nixon all had held court in the dark and cozy wooden booths at Martin’s Tavern on Wisconsin Avenue in Georgetown. On this day, a different breed of Cold Warrior was ordering up an oversized brunch at Martin’s: Gennady Vasilenko and rezidentura newcomers Valery Martynov and Sergei Motorin.
Briefing the new arrivals, Gennady explained the purpose of the large map in the rezidentura anteroom, the first thing an agent saw upon entering. Gennady happily showed the men around town, pointing out, especially to the gregarious Motorin, where the cutest girls could be found. Motorin, a known skirt chaser and prankster, had more in common with Gennady than did the straitlaced Martynov. They were both six-foot-two, womanizing tennis players and neighbors in Arlington. Motorin was also something of a Western music fan. In time, he would share another bond with Gennady: they were both regularly on Yakushkin’s shit list for general insubordination.
Then Gennady moved on to the subject of lonely girls in the pool of secretaries in the Soviet Embassy. Gennady and Motorin eventually would joke “Let’s raid the refrigerator” when they encountered a dry spell of American talent. Time would demonstrate that Motorin was as reckless as Gennady when it came to the ladies. One time he smashed up his car while squiring a prostitute around Washington. The FBI learned about it from the insurance adjustor assigned to estimate the damage.
Valery Martynov had a young family similar in age to Gennady’s. In time, he would come to share Gennady’s growing fondness for America to the point where he worked harder than other KGB agents to master English, not only for spying purposes but because of his genuine affinity for the country.
Although Gennady spent as little time as possible in the rezidentura, when there, he shared a cubicle with other spies who would alter his life, as well as the history of espionage, in major ways. One was, like Gennady, another fan of American music: a young B. B. King–loving officer named Anatoly Stepanov (pseudonym), who was a KGB legacy, the son of another LINE KR officer. “He was a squirrelly guy,” remembers Gennady, who remembered Stepanov from the days when they both worked at Yasenevo. “Not really a team player, out for himself.” At the moment, Stepanov’s self-serving attitude was just a minor irritation, but it would come to haunt Gennady in the decades ahead.
For Gennady, the cubicle boredom was finally broken when a suspicious walk-in arrived at the Soviet Embassy in the spring of 1980. Ronald William Pelton was a recently retired, highly placed official with the famously impenetrable—pre–Edward Snowden—National Security Agency. One day in 1980, Pelton walked off the street and into the embassy to volunteer his services. After a debriefing by Gennady’s colleague Vitaly Yurchenko, Gennady’s boss decided Pelton was a snare—a double agent—and he didn’t want to waste his time with him. “Let me try with this guy,” Gennady offered. It made sense: both men were schooled in technology, and it was hoped that would give them a starting point for friendly conversation. For Gennady, the Pelton recruitment was a perfect case in point to showcase his seducer’s modus operandi. During their meetings in pizza parlors and at malls, Gennady saw opportunity and cheered Pelton on, sympathizing with his financial struggles, the urgent repairs to his house he couldn’t afford to make, and the NSA bosses who didn’t appreciate his many gifts. 
In a few months, Gennady was squiring Pelton around Vienna, Austria, for clandestine debriefs—easier to soften a target to the notes of Mozart and Beethoven than those of John Philip Sousa, and it was a nice upgrade from pizza parlors. But the payoff was huge: Pelton eventually compromised, among other things, Operation Ivy Bells, the US scheme to monitor Soviet military communications, including submarine activity. He helped the Soviets uncover the bugging operation, which allowed them to take countermeasures, including passing potential disinformation. The rezidentura’s counterintelligence chief, Victor Cherkashin, summarizes Gennady’s success: “Washington… had spent hundreds of millions of dollars on the operation… Pelton shut down the whole project for $35,000.” Gennady had delivered big-time.
Gennady’s important assignments with Pelton and other walk-ins put his intricate dance with Jack and Dion on the back burner for the time being. The Musketeers’ soft recruitment gambits were seemingly to come to an end in 1981, when Gennady and his family were routinely rotated back to the Soviet Union. Before the Vasilenkos’ June departure, Dion went to his supervisor, Lane Crocker, with a last-ditch ploy. “I talked to Lane about the idea of offering Gennady an inducement to stay in the US,” Rankin recalls. “Jack and I thought that we couldn’t get an outright recruitment, but perhaps a defection.” With Irina, Ilya, and Julia here, the team believed this would be their best chance. Crocker, who supported both Dion and Operation DOVKA completely, quickly got his CIA counterpart’s concurrence on the overture. “I was given a large brown shopping bag containing four green cards for Gennady’s family and forty thousand dollars in cash,” says Rankin, which is the equivalent of more than $100,000 today. “That bag sat in my house for a week or so, until I could coordinate a meeting with Gennady. My wife, Jennifer, was a nervous wreck.”
George Powstenko arranged the meet-up at Blackie’s House of Beef in DC. There, Dion hauled his precious brown bag up to a private room arranged by George for the sit-down with Jack and Gennady. Before lunch, Dion gave George “the look,” which told him to disappear for a few minutes, after which Dion and Jack showed Gennady the booty with the clear implication that it represented just an initial show of good intentions. “We let him know that there’d be much more where that came from,” says Dion.
“All we want is for you to stay in America—no spying, just a better life,” explained Rankin.
Gennady responded predictably: “Just take out enough for lunch and a bottle of champagne.” As he said this, he was mindful of personal issues that trumped his love of Western stuff and these new friends. “I need to go home,” he explained. “Irina’s father is not doing well, and I do love my country. Now let’s eat.” An hour later, as the trio stood in the parking lot, Gennady added solemnly, “I don’t want to hear from you guys. I’ll help you find me when I get out.”
Dogged Dion made a few more attempts to change Gennady’s mind at social gatherings, but it was clear he was getting agitated, so Dion let it be, and the two said their goodbyes.
Soon thereafter, it was Jack’s turn to say a final farewell to his Russian Cowboy counterpart, driving the Vasilenkos to Dulles Airport. At the gate, after Irina and the kids had disappeared down the jetway, Jack gave his friend a “Russian bear” hug. One more time, Jack asked, “Are you sure I can’t get you and your family to stay?”
The refrain to switch sides had become more of a squabble between an old married couple at this point rather than an enticement to commit treason. Gennady just replied, “Would you stop with that already?”
“Call me when you get settled,” Jack said. 
“No way,” Gennady replied. “That’s not how it works in Moscow for KGB. But we will see each other again. This I promise. Like I told you before, I’ll help you find me when I’m out of the country. Tell all the American girls to wait for me.” He laughed as he boarded his plane.
When Jack returned to the parking garage, he noticed that Gennady had left a long box in the backseat of the car, to which a handwritten note had been affixed:
 
  Chris, they only made seven of these. Don’t ask how I got it. Of course, this means I can still chase girls! Until we meet again, GV.
  
Opening the box, Jack saw a custom Russian carbine, sporting a gorgeous hand-carved walnut stock. Jack would later learn that this was a rare MCC 551, designed for a former Communist Party bigwig.
For the next three years, Gennady was back at “Little Langley,” the KGB’s Yasenevo First Chief Directorate headquarters, working a desk job in the massive North America department, which consumed half the main building’s fifth floor. Gennady’s friend “Chris” was similarly assigned at the real Langley, where for the next five years he was tasked with updating the Agency’s field operations training—another blessed reason to be out of the building as much as possible. Some colleagues have opined that Agency bureaucrats still didn’t trust Jack in the field given his former alcohol problems. Others disagree, explaining that Jack was selected because he alone had inherited his mentor Hav Smith’s operational trickery, devised for the vicious Berlin front. Additionally, Jack’s experience included all that he had learned at the feet of his Laotian colleagues, Brian O’Connor, George Kenning Jr., and their “Black Thai” operatives, the Kangaroos, and all of that combined expertise was needed now more than ever. An espionage storm was brewing that would soon make the Musketeers’ carefree days but a distant memory.
In the 1980s, Cowboy Jack and his CIA colleagues were dealing with the harsh new reality of Iron Curtain espionage. According to a 2008 study by the Department of Defense, US spies saw a 30 percent drop in successful “espionage attempts” after 1980. Divorce rates among operatives doubled during the same period, and CIA field officers were being routinely identified and expelled from the “denied areas.” But most importantly, the work had become exponentially more dangerous than ever before—indeed deadly.
Haviland Smith once summarized the challenge starkly: “What most Americans don’t ever consider is that the job of CIA case officers who work overseas in human espionage operations is to break the laws of the countries where they serve. During the Cold War, when we met a Soviet citizen in Moscow who was one of our agents, we were breaking Soviet law by that simple act. There is no other nonmilitary organization in the US government whose job it is to break other countries’ laws.”
The KGB was always more adept at the craft of espionage, due in large part to the USSR’s closed-society history and the free rein given to its defense and security apparatus. By the ’80s, its home-turf surveillance had become downright smothering—not just on suspected spies but on all non-Soviets. Camera and microphone factories likely ran three shifts per day in order to keep up with the KGB’s demand that every conceivable Moscow hotel, restaurant, and museum be covered. Anya Schmemann, the daughter of Serge Schmemann, a reporter for the New York Times who had brought his family on his Moscow assignment during this period, recalled that her family was under relentless surveillance, including being followed, having their phones and apartment tapped, and having their mail opened. The Schmemanns accepted as fact that their government-provided housekeeper was providing the KGB with updates on the family’s activities—and they behaved accordingly.
Field operatives obtained evidence that the KGB was even resorting to the use of the dangerous tracking tool known to the CIA as “spy dust” and to the KGB as metka (Russian for “mark”). This substance—nitrophenyl pentadienal (NPPD), sometimes combined with luminol—was sprinkled on a target as a fine, invisible-to-the-eye powder. When a KGB agent shone a special light on the surface of the CIA operative’s clothes, the particles illuminated, making for easy tracking at night and in a crowd.
But the KGB wasn’t flawless. For the better part of a quarter century they failed to realize that a GRU general, Dmitri Polyakov (CIA code name BOURBON), had been spying for the CIA. Polyakov’s bosses had denied him the opportunity to take his gravely ill young son to the United States for medical treatment. The boy died, so Polyakov sought his revenge by furnishing the CIA with valuable information about Soviet battlefield weaponry and the state of the tenuous relationship between his country and Communist China. Some in the spy community believe that Polyakov’s information, coupled with a dose of Ping-Pong diplomacy,* helped pave the way for President Richard Nixon’s breakthrough outreach to China in 1972. A veteran CIA officer described Polyakov’s reports as being “like Christmas.” Said former CIA Director James Woolsey, “Polyakov was the jewel in the crown.” Polyakov was executed for treason in 1988.
Often a spy’s detection came down to something as simple as a staple: meticulously detailed CIA-made fake passports were routinely spotted as such by KGB-trained customs officers due to the fact that the documents’ bindings were held together with staples made of superior American stainless-steel-coated wire, whereas a true Soviet passport began falling apart as soon as it was put together, due to inferior copper-coated Russian staples that began corroding immediately. But more likely their discovery came as a result of the KGB’s brilliant surveillance, brutal interrogations, and seemingly endless supply of agents on the streets. US spies referred to this oppressive—and brutally effective—Soviet-style espionage as the “Moscow rules” (commandments for operating in “denied areas”), and in order to deal with this dangerous new world, CIA executives decided by 1980 that field operatives required better training.
Up until this time, field case officers relied on the training that all new personnel received at the CIA’s then-secret facility called The Farm, situated between Interstate 64 and the York River, near Williamsburg, Virginia. Disguised on maps and signage as a fictitious military base named “Camp Peary,” with a gated security entrance sign bearing the words ARMED FORCES EXPERIMENTAL TRAINING ACTIVITY, the nearly ten-thousand-acre complex is actually owned and operated by US spymasters.
On the property sits a barracks, warehouse, gym, target ranges, and even a private airstrip labeled “Camp Peary Airstrip” on Google Maps. Rookie officers spend their first four months completing the Agency’s Operations Course (OC), where they learn to shed surveillance, recruit and handle agents, master disguises, and perform basic paramilitary functions. The Farm’s training program certainly had been adequate for the first decades of the CIA, which was founded in 1947, but considering the KGB tactics developing behind the Iron Curtain—and the CIA’s losses—it was found clearly wanting. Thus it was decided that officers heading into that particular maelstrom needed additional preparation, beyond the OC.
The origins of the OC involved Hav Smith’s time in Berlin in 1961 when the Wall went up. Having to send so-called rabbits into the Soviet Sector had required a whole new approach. It hadn’t been so much about guarding the rabbits; it had been about protecting their assets. If the enemy was able to follow a case officer to a meet-up, the officer would be arrested, perhaps briefly roughed up, and then exiled back to the US. But the hard-won asset would almost assuredly be killed.
Hav went back to the US to formulate the OC. Dave Forden was one of his first students. They trained in New York City’s Grand Central Station, where the “rabbits” were set loose, and Hav stood on a second-floor balcony so he could watch the action. The new brush pass technique was perfected there, going up and down the station stairs.
The idea for new human-contact tradecraft had been firmly resisted by Deputy Director of Plans Richard Helms in the 1960s, but in the 1980s, with “Moscow rules” in effect, it was clear to all that even more involved training had to be done. To head up the development of an additional course, Dave Forden—by now the SE Division chief—needed someone who was as tough as nails, could think subversively, and possessed years of experience in hostile “denied” overseas environments. Unsurprisingly, Forden turned to Marine Jack Platt, whose mentor, now-retired tradecraft master Haviland Smith, had taught him many of his best surveillance-detection creations. As Jack told trainee-author Michael Sellers in 2010, “We stood on the shoulders of great men and women who ran the course before us.”
Working with Haviland’s successor, Gus Hathaway, Jack took on the mission of creating the additional CIA field-training program, the Internal Operations Course (IOC). The IOC would be required, pre-assignment preparation for all young officers, code clerks, secretaries, and NSA monitors assigned to work behind the Iron Curtain and other denied areas. (It had been decided that using experienced operatives was actually a drawback because the KGB likely had identified them already. Therefore only rookie field officers would be used.) Observed and handpicked by all of Langley’s division chiefs, the “first draft” of OC grads always went to the critical SE Division, of which Jack was a veteran. The draftees nonetheless had a large washout percentage in Jack’s grueling IOC, which took place on the streets of Washington, in its suburbs, and in surrounding rural locales.
Years later, Cowboy Jack summarized his strategy: “I wanted to turn the CIA into a mini Parris Island. The goal was survival, survival, survival. You’re being sent into hell, a police dictatorship. They’ll wreck your car, break into your house, anything. The only way to learn to live with that is to be harassed yourself. I made sure every single one that was going overseas got arrested by the FBI. I said, ‘I want a real arrest, throw them on the fucking ground, put them through a ninety-minute interrogation. Make it as tough as you can.’ Over the years I trained three hundred forty officers, only six were women.”
Cowboy called them “pipeliners.” They were young spies hoping to be assigned to “the action,” which consisted largely of the Soviet and Eastern Europe hot zones. Pipeliners, more formally called Zephyrs, were an elite group of new operatives selected from the best OC graduates of The Farm. Cowboy enlisted a group of CIA and FBI instructors, whom he referred to as the “Dirty Dozen,” to whip the young ones into shape. Among these instructors were men such as Jim “Horse” Smith, Bob “the Beard” Miller, Gene Lassiter, and even occasionally his Musketeer pal Dion Rankin. Over the course of six weeks, the rookies would dutifully report every morning to the Agency’s Ames Building on North Fort Myer Drive in Rosslyn, Virginia, where they soon learned not to make any personal plans before midnight for the nearly two-month duration.
On the first day, Cowboy told the pipeliners they were going to be pushed to their limits. It would be harsh, unfair. “You’re going to hate us,” he warned. It would be a crucible. Zephyr Mike Sellers called the course “organized mayhem,” perhaps accounting for the participation of his wife and six-week-old son (Cowboy awarded the infant a “youngest graduate” diploma). Sellers relates an exercise in which his team’s job was to retrieve a milk carton strategically abandoned at a Washington, DC, marina. When he picked it up, “Fifteen FBI guys threw me facedown on the floor. I thought we stumbled into a real drug bust.” Some people couldn’t withstand the trauma of arrest. In the end, there was no course grade, but Cowboy would discreetly meet with his bosses upon the course’s conclusion and inform them who wasn’t fit for fieldwork.
By far the most important facets of the program involved spotting and evading hostile surveillance (“dry cleaning”); making dead drops, brush passes, and moving car deliveries (MCDs); and defeating harsh interrogation. One of the IOC instructors, Tony Mendez, in his 2002 book Spy Dust, recalled how the Moscow rules were inculcated into the aspiring operatives by making the Soviets “think it was their fault that they had lost you, not vice versa, because KGB officers knew better than to report their own mistakes.”
Mendez also described how he drilled a mantra into the trainees, a slogan that is prominent in Ian Fleming’s James Bond thriller Goldfinger: “Once is an accident; twice, a coincidence; three times, an enemy action.” The surveilled hoped to emulate Hav Smith’s momentary “gap” from their pursuers, only long enough to drop off a document—or a human. One of the more cinematic evasion techniques Jack taught his charges was the coincidentally nicknamed “jack-in-the-box” (JIB). It consisted of a low-cost piece of gadgetry that Ian Fleming’s Q would never be seen with: a flat cardboard cutout of a human torso that, when a lever was pulled by a vehicle driver, would pop up from a box (or in one real-life case, a hollow cake) and appear to the KGB pursuers, usually trailing two blocks behind, as a passenger. Of course, the operative who had been in the passenger seat would have jumped from the car during a “gap,” whereupon the driver would deploy the JIB, going so far as to pull puppetry strings to make the cardboard move occasionally. The escaped passenger also would have put on a disguise before jumping so, even if spotted by the enemy, he could walk right past them undetected. One soon-to-be infamous pipeliner, Edward Lee Howard, would later admit that he often used his JIB for distinctly non-CIA business: partaking of the Dulles Airport area’s high-occupancy vehicle lanes.
But not even a JIB could protect Howard and his wife, Mary, from the searing pressure of Jack Platt’s training course. On one occasion, the Howards were tasked with engaging in a dead-drop pickup of valuable microfilm near a Washington marina. FBI agent Courtney West was assigned to observe the Howards, and he did so undetected. “We chased them down to make the arrest, when all of a sudden, Howard floors it on the George Washington Parkway, eventually going over one hundred miles per hour,” recalls West. “Suddenly, he spins around, making a one hundred eighty degree U-turn and races past us, yelling ‘Fuck you’ through his open window.” That’s when Cowboy Jack got on the radio and ordered West to “Pull that bitch over!” Eventually, Howard was captured and hauled down to the Washington Field Office in Buzzard Point.
The couple was separated and aggressively interrogated. “Through all this, Mary remained tearful but silent,” says West. “Even when the FBI agent came into the interrogation room with the ‘results’ of the lab tests of the powder that indicated pure heroin, which came with a lengthy prison sentence, Mary did a great job and didn’t break cover after her arrest. But her husband was a different story.” West remembers that, under interrogation, Mary began wheezing, the result of an asthma attack. She asked West to obtain the name of her medication from her husband, who was being questioned in another room. West was stunned by Howard’s icy reply: “Fuck her.” Mary may have never broken cover, but the terror of that confrontation never left her, even after she was informed that the ordeal had been an exercise. “I remember Edward Lee Howard very well,” Cowboy recalled. “I trained both he and Mary. I liked Mary a lot.” West remembers that Cowboy wrote a negative report on Edward Lee Howard. “They never should have kept him at the CIA after that report,” West says. Had the Agency dismissed Howard, lives would have been saved and the Moscow Station wouldn’t have been set back twenty years.
On occasion, case officers who had experienced Moscow rules firsthand lectured the Zephyrs, and one of the most notable was Martha “Marti” Peterson. Thirty-five-year-old Marti Peterson had been the CIA’s first female field officer stationed in Moscow, in 1975. Like Cowboy, she had lived in Laos, where she was the wife of John Peterson, a former Green Beret who joined the CIA after his discharge. While stationed in Laos for the Agency in 1972, John was killed in action in a helicopter crash. (One of the stars on the CIA’s hallowed Memorial Wall is for John.) At just twenty-seven years of age, the crushed Marti was already a widow. In part to honor her hero husband, she joined the Agency in 1975.
In Moscow, Marti encountered Moscow rules at their worst, and Cowboy had her impart what she had seen on the Zephyrs. She talked about the nonstop harassment, including phones ringing at all hours of the night. The US Embassy, where she had had a cover job in the clerical pool, was bombarded with microwave radiation to jam electronic communications, resulting in a number of deadly cancers contracted by Marti’s fellow officers. It was also a lonely job since all officers were forbidden from having contact outside the station.
Marti spent eight hours a day at her cover job, where embassy clerical work was mostly performed by women. She likely hadn’t known that she had been handpicked for the Moscow posting precisely because she was a woman. The station chief had concluded correctly that, due to the overt sexism of the time, all the KGB officers would assume Marti couldn’t be a spy. That allowed her to use her lunch breaks and after-work hours to make covert drops and pickups with one of the CIA’s greatest assets ever. Code-named TRIGON, KGB agent Aleksandr Dmitryevich Ogorodnik over the last few years had given the “main enemy” huge caches of photographed secret diplomatic cables, providing key insights into Soviet policy and negotiating positions. Many of his purloined documents were sent to the Carter White House daily. Among other things, Marti had also arranged for TRIGON to receive a special pen that contained a cyanide capsule for use in the event of his capture.
For over a year, Marti conducted successful dead drops for TRIGON around the city, often of spy-camera film. On July 15, 1977, after she returned from a late-night drop, more than a dozen KGB men jumped from a van, threw her in, and took her to the dreaded Lubyanka Prison for three hours of harsh interrogation. Although male KGB officers groped her until they found a radio receiver in her bra, she was released, having admitted nothing. The next day, Marti took the first flight out of Moscow, never to return.
Hours of deceptive maneuvers, including entering and exiting three subways and walking miles to shed any surveillance, still hadn’t been good enough, or so Marti had thought. Years later, the CIA discovered that the operation had been sold out by a crooked CIA contract translator who had given information to the KGB about a traitorous diplomat fitting TRIGON’s profile. Thus TRIGON, whom Marti had never actually met, was also rolled up, and when he was forced to sign a confession, he grabbed the pen Marti had supplied him with and bit down on it, breaking the cyanide capsule hidden inside. He died instantly.
At Cowboy’s SE Division, many tears were shed for their lost asset. Marti would eventually receive the William J. Donovan Award, an intelligence honor named for the founder of the CIA’s predecessor, the OSS, and the George H. W. Bush Award for excellence in counterterrorism.
Drawing on her experience, Marti put Cowboy’s trainees through a simulated arrest and interrogation. “Part of what you don’t know about yourself, until the time comes, is how you’ll react in a bad situation,” she told them. She also advised, “Always speak English so you know what you’re saying—and remain calm.” But by far the lasting impression left on the Zephyrs was the bone-deep sorrow they would endure if one of their assets were to be lost.
After the basics had been taught, the rookies were assigned a test mission in the field, where their performances would be graded. Zephyrs usually operated in husband-wife teams since that was the preferred deployment overseas. Typically the teams would be instructed to arrive at a package drop-off point, after having spotted and shed any surveillance over many hours of movement, pick up a package, and deliver it at another drop-off point, again undetected. The difficulty lay in the fact that some two-dozen men and civilian surveillance experts (from the Special Surveillance Group, or SSG)—often retired FBI agents disguised as the most unassuming shoppers, elderly couples, sailors on leave, etc.—were placed along the route between the Ames Building and the package location (frequently the CI-4 hangout Gangplank Marina).
Occasionally Cowboy and instructor Bob “the Beard” were not present for the 8 a.m. release of the pipeliners. That’s because they would stop by Rockville High School to take the Platt twins, Michelle and Diana, out of class for a seemingly reoccurring family problem. The actual reason was not some domestic melodrama but Cowboy’s desire to have extremely hard-to-detect spotters—kids—chasing down his rookies. The SSG participants were great at disguises, but none of them could look like actual sixteen-year-olds. The logic was that no one would suspect a kid of being a spy. Cowboy would admonish his IOC students for having the preconceived notion that spies were white males of military bearing.
Diana Platt grins broadly as she remembers her father exploiting her twin-ness to train and test his students. The students who realized they had been followed got a bronze star. The students who realized they had been followed by a young girl got a silver star. One student, however, sheepishly reported back to Cowboy, “I think I was followed by a young girl and… um… this may sound crazy, but I think she may be twins.” Cowboy was delighted, and this student got a gold star for his perceptiveness.
Michelle and Diana never busted an actual package retrieval, but they had other successes against the Zephyrs, getting close enough to overhear their strategies. “We overheard conversations they should not have been having,” Michelle recalls. “They discounted us due to our age.” The girls, of course, had a blast playing hooky from school in order to play spy versus spy on the streets of Annapolis or Georgetown. As for their father, he had to keep this ploy secret not only from the pipeliners but also from his CIA superior Dave Forden, and even more so from his ultimate superior. “I remember that Dad was very emphatic about one thing,” Michelle says. “Do not tell your mother!” As for Cowboy’s employer, Michelle opines, “The CIA would have been pissed that Jack was using his kids for surveillance. But it was this risk taking and flouting of the rules that made him effective. And you could take risks like that back then—there wasn’t constant oversight and political correctness the way there is now.”
One time, when she was in her early twenties, Diana was caught by a police officer as she was rustling around in the bushes near an Arlington, Virginia, shopping center. The cop arrested her for solicitation, as it was an area known for prostitution. Witnessing the arrest, Cowboy’s team leader, Jim “Horse” Smith, a tough Marine sharpshooter, intervened and explained to the cop that he had walked in on a CIA training program and had just busted the daughter of a legendary CIA operative. “The cop was pissed,” Diana says, “but he let me go.”
The trainees had been told how to slip their coverage by running mundane errands, entering large department stores where they might slip on a disguise before taking a back exit, or performing an MCD if they created a slight gap in coverage. All the while, Cowboy and his instructors—like Hav Smith at Grand Central Station years before—would watch the action from above, usually a rooftop. Should the trainees spot a pursuer they couldn’t elude, they were instructed to abort the operation, which was graded highly since it was also the right thing to do in the field.
Trainee Jason Matthews recalled for Men’s Journal how Cowboy’s instructors also played mind games with the Zephyrs in order to prepare them for hostile KGB surveillance and interrogation. On one occasion, operatives broke into Matthews’s house, defecated in his toilet, and poured anchovy oil in his car’s engine block. “It’s sort of the psychic equivalent of Hell Week for SEALs,” Matthews said—except it lasted for eight weeks. “They want to see who can handle it and who can’t.” Brant Bassett recently said, about training for an assignment in Budapest, “The training was daylong and nightlong. Pressure was applied to see if you’d crack. At the end of a day we’d meet in a bar or restaurant and Jack would tell us how we did.” Cowboy wanted to find out how observant the pipeliners had been: How many agents were there? Could he describe them? What kinds of cars did they use? License plate numbers?
Jack Lee, Cowboy’s longtime friend and colleague at SE, remembers watching Cowboy at these skull sessions. “Despite a gruff, Marine external demeanor, Jack was disarming to colleagues because he was very understanding of people, empathetic with their problems. People wanted to please him. If you fell short, he would not admonish, he would work to improve you. This contrasted with the tough nature of the Internal Operations Course, which was daunting, but Jack wanted you to succeed. Everybody loved Jack.”
However, Burton Gerber, who during this time replaced Forden as SE chief, recalled that Jack had trouble restraining himself with his foul language, which was a problem with some of the wives being trained. Nonetheless, Gerber knew that Jack’s IOC was a great success. “Jack was a treasure to the CIA because of his contribution with IOC,” Gerber recalls. “He was energetic and tough but encouraging. In short, he was a great motivator and leader.”
On their final day of testing, the Zephyrs were even tracked by planes. The IOC was a big-ticket budget item for the Agency, but the cost was an indicator of how much espionage behind the Iron Curtain was a priority.
For that last all-important IOC mission, the one that would determine if the rookies had the right stuff, the Zephyrs spent eight to ten hours on the streets, running a gauntlet of disguised volunteers in order to lose them, and eventually made their pickups (or aborted the mission if spotted), only to be arrested by the FBI on the way back to Rosslyn. The trainees were handcuffed, thrown onto the floor of a Bureau vehicle, and hauled off to a jail in downtown Washington. The trainees, in fact, were taken not to an actual jail but to the basement of the Washington Field Office in Buzzard Point—something Cowboy hoped they might notice on the way in. Few did.
 
There, they were informed that the package they had been carrying contained cocaine. Next, the husband and wife were separated and subjected to harsh, often physically intimidating interrogation lasting hours. The men were forcibly strip-searched, and both husbands and wives were told that the other was cooperating. Eventually, Cowboy entered the room and announced that the arrest was part of the training, a KGB-like detention to determine who would crack and say they were CIA. If they had copped to that fact, they would likely become supporting benchwarmers overseas, a major humiliation.
Jack Lee, an occasional IOC instructor, remembers, “People in [the] IOC often thought a real operation was going down. They didn’t know it was training. [The] FBI would actually arrest people, to see if they’d crack. If you said, ‘I’m CIA,’ thinking it would help you, you failed. You had to keep your cover. Only a few could do it.” The phony arrests were the big secret of the IOC, the ultimate test of a Zephyr’s mettle. “We were sworn to secrecy as far as telling future trainees what happened,” says Brant Bassett.
Bassett was one of those who made the grade. He recently described the benefits of the IOC experience, especially how he and his wife endured grueling training with their three small children in tow. By the time the Bassetts arrived for their assignment in Budapest, they were “dry cleaning” aficionados who had never been caught, which was a huge victory given the stakes. Among the things Bassett learned from one of his agents was that the entire US battle plan for fighting World War III in Europe had gotten into Soviet hands before the Pentagon brass even saw it. As a result, the Soviets changed the locations and assignments of their land and air forces. Given Bassett’s freedom to operate, he and his CIA colleagues were eventually able to nail the US traitor Clyde Conrad. Bassett says, “Thank you, Jack Platt.”
Clyde Lee Conrad, while stationed in Budapest for the US Army in the 1980s, was a highly paid traitor who sold top-secret NATO war plans to Soviet-bloc Hungary for over a decade. As Bassett implies, Conrad was caught in Operation Iceberg and sentenced to life in prison thanks in part to Jack’s training of investigators like Bassett. At Conrad’s sentencing, the presiding judge noted the importance of his capture: “If war had broken out between NATO and the Warsaw Pact, the West would have faced certain defeat. NATO would have quickly been forced to choose between capitulation or the use of nuclear weapons on German territory. Conrad’s treason had doomed the Federal Republic to become a nuclear battlefield.”*
Author and thirty-three-year veteran of the CIA’s clandestine Directorate of Operations, Jason Matthews, himself a grad of Cowboy’s IOC, recently added, “It’s something not many people at the Agency can do.” However, those who graduated entered the Langley-to-Moscow pipeline as prepared as humanly possible. One of Cowboy’s trainees would also utilize the techniques taught him in IOC to evade detection when successfully making a dash to defect to the KGB.
Cowboy Jack regarded his work with the IOC as his greatest achievement at the CIA. To everyone who knew him in those years, it was clearly his passion project. When asked about Jack’s all-day, all-night course, SE chief Burton Gerber wondered how he ever saw his family: “Jack seemed to never take vacations.”
 
Despite the vast training improvements designed by Jack, Iron Curtain operations were still getting busted, and assets killed. Due to its now improved training course, CIA executives were certain that tradecraft, including blown surveillance detection, wasn’t the problem. As CIA Director William Casey would eventually ask his Deputy Director for Operations (DDO), “What about the human penetration? Do you think there’s a spy in here?”
