Chapter 06 - The Quisling
 
I told you I knew how to fucking train people.

In 1984, Gennady was finally relieved of his tedious desk job at Yasenevo and posted to the Caribbean country of Guyana, which had opened diplomatic relations with the USSR fourteen years earlier. “Headquarters had promised to send me to New York,” Gennady says. “But at the last minute I was sent to Georgetown [Guyana]—some sort of security emergency.” Gennady wasn’t happy and told his superiors as much. Nevertheless, he knew, for his career’s sake, that he ultimately had to accept the post. His boss added that they would make it up to him.
The “Land of Many Waters” was seen as a strategic Soviet partner in Central America and the Caribbean, a base for operations against US strategic missile submarines as well as for sabotaging lines of communication in the mid-Atlantic and South Atlantic Ocean. The small country also had prime deposits of bauxite, a main source of aluminum (a major Soviet industry) and an ore in short supply in the USSR. Yet all of this looked more impressive on paper than it was in reality.
“We had a big station in Georgetown, but no counterintelligence function,” Gennady explains. “More work needed to be done to protect the embassy—and to spy on Americans. They promised they’d only put me there for a year before sending me to New York.” Another DC posting was against procedure, but New York would have allowed Gennady to be close to the other Musketeers. At this point, he had been out of contact with them for three years, and he missed them. It would have been career suicide, if not actual physical suicide, for him to make contact while working in Moscow.
Gennady may have been unhappy with the new posting, but he made the most of it, as only he could. One of his regular responsibilities was accompanying the embassy accountant to the bank, where he made deposits or withdrew large sums. On one such visit, Gennady noticed and then fell hard for a gorgeous young teller named Sherry. One day, he offered to “give her a lift.” (“I ended up giving her a lift for one year,” Gennady says with a sly grin.) He began dating Sherry and invited her to volleyball matches. At some point the Soviet ambassador pulled Gennady aside in the embassy and admonished him for dating a woman so young. “Now, knock it off or you’ll get thrown in jail and cause an international incident.” Did he knock it off? “Of course not,” Gennady says. “Well, not right away.” He saw her a few more times, then dropped her.
Almost as important as the girls was his friendship with the other Musketeers. Soon he hit upon a way to make contact. Among Gennady’s other routine duties in 1984 was to liaise between the Soviet ambassador in Guyana and the Soviet UN mission in New York. According to Cowboy, during phone calls to the UN representative—calls Gennady knew were tapped by the NSA for the US Embassy in Guyana, located a mile west along the seawall—Gennady broke the cardinal rule of tradecraft and announced himself with his real name (not his cover, ILYA) in a stage voice that would have been crystal clear to even the most dunderheaded American phone transcriber:

  GENNADY: Hello, this is Gennady Vasilenko—that’s G-E-N-N-A-D-Y, V-A-S-I-L-E-N-K-O.
           I’m calling from the Soviet Embassy in Guyana. G-U-Y-A-N-A. I used to work 
           at the Soviet Embassy in Washington from 1977 to 1980. That’s right, 
           Washington, DC.
           
For good measure, Gennady added that he needed “some Visine and parts for a Chevy Blazer,” the Musketeers private code for “Come get me!” The secret code also guaranteed the Musketeers that the caller was indeed Gennady, not some imposter provocateur. The Americans traced Gennady’s location, and the conversation was quickly relayed to the men it was actually intended for: Dion Rankin and Cowboy Jack. In Gennady’s version of the story, his whereabouts likely had been discovered already by Jack and Dion’s friend McKim Symington, who worked at the US Embassy in Georgetown, Guyana.
Word of Gennady came first to the Washington Field Office and Dion Rankin, who had continued to believe that Gennady’s parting words in DC left the door open to possible recruitment, or at least defection. He immediately called Jack, who took leave from the IOC in Rosslyn and drove to Buzzard Point, where Dion read him the transcript so Jack could decide for himself whether it was a provocation. Dion had barely gotten the words out of his mouth when Jack shot back, “Genya’s in Georgetown. Let’s go!”
Dion agreed with Cowboy’s faith in Operation DOVKA and quickly broached with his superiors the possibility of a trip. “I never had any problems with Crocker when it came to the Genya thing,” Dion says. “When I asked permission to travel to Guyana he immediately said, ‘Okay, go.’”
If only it were that easy, an envious Cowboy Jack thought. In fact, Cowboy’s cobra-mongoose relationship with Agency executives on the seventh floor would prove a major stumbling point. They had come to think of the whole operation as little more than a boondoggle for juvenile delinquent spies who liked to drink, shoot squirrels, and generally screw around on the government’s dime. Enough was enough. Both SE chief Burton Gerber and Counterintelligence Director Paul Redmond had made it clear to Cowboy that they were finished funding the Musketeers’ personal vacations, disguised, in their view, as Agency business. Gerber, in a recent interview, recalled that he felt that the friendship was just a personal thing, and he saw no strategic or tactical value in the cultivation of Gennady. It was a friendship, period. While Gennady was promising in theory, Gerber was not interested in financing the international target-shooting getaways of good buddies. Gerber also vetoed the purchase of a hunting rifle for Gennady for the same reason—not because he was anti-gift or anti-gun but because he saw no value in it. “I don’t see what you can do there,” Gerber told Cowboy. “I don’t see that he’s recruitable.”
Dion accompanied Jack as he went around Gerber and took his trip request to Redmond on the seventh floor. It was an encounter he’d never forget—and it was typical Cowboy. “Jack and I sat on a small couch facing Redmond’s desk,” Dion remembers. “It was a narrow room, and there were two of his junior execs sitting off to the side. When Redmond first indicated he was against the Guyana thing, Jack, who was decked out in full Cowboy regalia, slowly and dramatically pulls a cigarette out of his vest pocket—he was a chain-smoker at this time.” Of course, smoking was against the rules in the executive offices, so everyone’s eyes were riveted to that Marlboro. “So he continues making his case for the trip as he lights up. Except for Jack’s voice, you could hear a pin drop.” All eyes were on Jack’s cigarette because they were wondering what the hell he was going to do with it in the ashtray-less suite.
Dion couldn’t stifle laughter as he recounted how Jack proceeded to speak ever so slowly about Gennady in Guyana, all the while tapping his ashes onto Redmond’s polished tile floor. “It went on for twenty minutes,” says Dion. “It was like a comedy bit, but just for my benefit. Redmond and the other two never said a word. They were horrified. But Jack just kept on talking until there was a pile of ash on the floor.” Finally Jack threw the cigarette on the floor and squashed it under his boot. “For his encore, he threw the butt under the cushion of Redmond’s sofa. Then he said, ‘Thanks for your consideration,’ and we walked out into the hall.”
“What the hell was that?!” Dion asked as they entered the elevator. 
“Fuck ’em!” Jack said in the elevator containing a half-dozen shocked secretarial staff. Jack just smiled and said, “Good morning, ladies.”
“You had to love him,” Dion says. 
Of course, not everyone on the seventh floor agreed with Dion. Although Burton Gerber admired Jack, he was also aware of many fellow executives who weren’t amused by Jack’s brusque manner. One CIA colleague expressed it more candidly, saying that Agency management was just plain afraid of him. “His personality became a problem for Jack at the CIA,” Gerber says. “He could have advanced further if he had gotten it under control.” To which Jack would have replied that he had no interest in advancement—he just wanted to be left alone to do his patriotic duty. Semper fi.
Dion and Jack concluded that the Agency was concerned with more than the company expense account; they worried the overture was actually a provocation, and they didn’t wish to take the risk. But Jack thought—knew—that his superiors were missing the big picture. Who knew what kind of information was hibernating in Gennady’s brain, especially considering that his father-in-law had been one of the Wise Men of the Soviet nuclear program? Didn’t the suits understand that cultivating sources wasn’t like dropping a coin in a vending machine, then pulling a knob to release an order of nicely packaged treachery? Didn’t the suits trust Jack to not fall for a provocation? Although Jack had a personal interest in seeing his Russian friend, he and Dion also held out that Gennady would someday end up living in the US, and when that time came, he would be a great asset for both their agencies.
As it was, Jack went back to Rosslyn and continued to train others for overseas action while Dion spent six weeks at the CIA, training and learning about Guyana. Dion then made the trip alone and checked into the Pegasus Hotel in Georgetown as a diplomat named “Donald Williams.” The Pegasus overlooks the Caribbean and the 280-mile-long seawall that protects the below-sea-level country. It was the hotel of choice for visiting government employees since it was located just two blocks from the US Embassy. Ironically, it also attracted a decidedly nongovernmental crowd. “It was like a scene from Casablanca—all spies, drug dealers, and con men staying there,” remembers Dion. “But it’s the only decent hotel. All the water in Guyana made you sick—you had to down a cocktail before the foul-water ice melted. The hotel buffet was dried toast, dried bacon, and egg whites—just whites because the chickens were malnourished. A plate of eggs looked like a plate of snot. The people were poor as shit there.”
Dion proceeded about a mile east to the Soviet compound, which took up a large square block where Pere Street abuts the Caribbean. The complex included a basketball court, a tennis court, a large pool, and a volleyball area. Dion pictured his old friend spending a good deal of his time at these recreations. Once inside, Dion had the receptionist page Gennady. “In a few minutes he walks into the conference room where I was waiting,” Dion says. “We both played it cool, knowing we were being watched. I told him I was staying at the Pegasus. Later at the hotel I get a message to meet him by the jagged seawall at ten that night. When the cab dropped me off and drove away it was pitch black. I walked for two miles to lose possible surveillance—Jack would have been pleased—until I arrived at the beach location. Gennady showed up right on time. We got reacquainted, but I still played it cool, no pitch. The first thing he said was ‘Where’s Chris?’”
About an hour later, Gennady drove Dion to within a few blocks of his hotel, and Dion proceeded back on foot. He stayed a week in Georgetown, where the duo met each other every day, often shooting targets from the seawall. Dion laughs. “One thing was clear. Gennady hadn’t changed a bit. He had at least two girlfriends there, including a pharmacist. One day I went to his apartment and I saw Irina, who was there for her twice-yearly visit. She was screaming at him.” Ilya and Julia weren’t there—they were no longer permitted to leave the USSR because they were teenagers. Irina could leave because she was the wife of a “diplomat.” “But Irina was frightened that Gennady would get into trouble by hanging with me,” Dion says.
After the two men parted ways each night, they were likely at their typewriters, simultaneously writing up their reports. Gennady’s Yasenevo superior, fully aware of his officer’s history with the other Musketeers, was furious. “He warned me not to talk to either of them. He said it’s a provocation,” Gennady says. “I told him to fuck off. ‘If you don’t trust me, send me home. I don’t want to be here anyway.’”
For the rest of the week, Gennady and Dion continued meeting. Thus once again Gennady had allowed his friendships with the Musketeers to force him to deceive his own agency. These deceptions would prove to be monumental mistakes, but, like Jack, Gennady felt the friendships were worth the risk. When Gennady bid Dion goodbye on his last day, he said, “Tell the Cowboy to get his ass down here!”

The February 1985 Guyana Musketeers reunion was set to be a surprise, a celebration of Jack’s birthday that month and, belatedly, Gennady’s December birthday. For this trip, Jack used his overseas cover name, “Charles Kneller,” while Dion once again went by “Donald Williams.” After checking in at the Pegasus, Jack stayed behind while Dion walked to the Soviet Embassy, where he made a point of accidentally running into Gennady and invited him back to the hotel for a drink after work.
That evening, Gennady appeared at Dion’s small room, but before they could settle in, Dion took a camera from his suitcase and asked the Russian to pose.
“What, the FBI doesn’t have enough pictures of me already?” asked Gennady. 
“Well, this is going to be a special shot,” answered Dion. 
Then Gennady was jumped from behind by someone (a thug?) who had been hiding in the closet, as Dion clicked away on his Nikon. Was this a setup? Gennady thought for a second. When he looked down and saw that he was being hugged by a man with half a finger missing on his left hand, he broke into a huge smile, captured by Dion’s camera.
“Cowboy! What took you so long?” Gennady laughed. “I mean to come out of the closet.” Now the two were hugging each other face-to-face.
“You never call me anymore,” Jack feigned like a spurned teenage girl. 
“Okay, ladies, break it up,” Dion interrupted. 
The trio caught up in the following hours, solidifying plans for the rest of the four-day trip. For the next few days, Jack, Gennady, and Dion met down at the seawall, where they picnicked, shot at tin cans, or wined and dined at the best bistros Georgetown had to offer. At the end of the trip, the two American Musketeers dutifully filed their reports, while the Russian did not. No recruitment had been attempted by any of the friends. But Jack and Dion held to their gut feelings that by merely gaining Gennady’s friendship, something good would happen one day.

Back in Washington that spring, Dion and Jack found their professional worlds in upheaval. While the irrepressible Russian Cowboy was left to play volleyball and sun himself among the bikinis on Guyana’s “63 Beach, Berbice,” Dion and his CI-4 Squad, and Jack and his SE Division, were considering much more sobering business: recently there had been a marked uptick in Americans spying against the US. In 1985 and 1986, there would be fourteen traitors arrested. A report written years later by top CIA mole hunter Sandy Grimes concluded that some thirty CIA operations against the Soviets had been fatally compromised.
The KGB busted Moscow case officers Michael Sellers and Eric Sites, both of whom had to be exfiltrated back to the US. The cover of GRU (Soviet military intelligence) colonel Sergei Bokhan was blown, forcing him, after ten years of working for the Agency, to be essentially smuggled to the US. At one point in 1985, the CIA lost six Iron Curtain assets (foreign penetration agents) in six months—either known executions or “disappearances.”
Then there was the loss, after five years of hard work, of a valuable CIA-NSA joint technical success. Code-named GT/TAW, it involved the planting of a sophisticated tape recorder and electronic bug in a sewer on the main landline cable that connected the KGB’s headquarters in Moscow to its nuclear weapons research institute south of the capital.
“This whole place is falling apart,” Paul Redmond, the CIA’s legendary chief of Counterintelligence, concluded. “Everybody’s getting rolled up.” Although experienced CIA officers had planned their Moscow operations fastidiously—utilizing Russian clothes, Russian language, and the latest in Ian Fleming–type gadgets—they were routinely bested by their KGB opponents. The mystery was how.
But the Americans were not alone in their travails. The Soviets had their own losses to repair, especially the losses of John Walker Jr. and Ronald Pelton, the NSA asset cultivated by Gennady.
CIA director Casey had been correct when he speculated about a turncoat, except that he had seriously underestimated: there was more than one. Cowboy Jack would soon learn that one of the worst was among his own Zephyr IOC graduates. In late August 1985, during a regular visit to see Musketeer Dion and Lane Crocker at Buzzard Point, Jack got the sobering news that a couple he had put through the pipeline gauntlet was suspected in the exposure of one of the CIA’s best Soviet assets. Jack was crestfallen. He not only had prepared them for a Moscow Station posting but had developed a special father-daughter bond with the woman under suspicion. The couple in question was Edward Lee and Mary Howard. “Ed was always a problem, but I would have been stunned to learn that Mary had done such a thing,” Jack said.
The Howards had both joined the Agency in 1981, after meeting in the Peace Corps years earlier and marrying in 1976. Edward had a love of James Bond movies; however, like Bond, he had a fondness for alcohol and, unlike Bond, a recreational interest in pot, hashish, cocaine, LSD, and Quaaludes. In hindsight, most at the CIA say he never should have been recruited in the first place. But incredibly, both Edward and Mary Howard were not only hired but also assigned to the elite SE Division, where they were groomed to relocate under deep cover to the most demanding station: Moscow. Most significantly, Edward was briefed on Adolf Tolkachev, a Soviet engineer who for the last five years had been a valuable CIA source of Soviet fighter jet radar defense systems intel—for a CIA fee of $200,000 per year placed in an escrow account for him. When Howard landed in Moscow, he would likely become Tolkachev’s case officer.
After completing Jack’s training, though, and before the couple was dispatched to Moscow, Howard was fired, in May 1983, after failing four polygraph tests (tests were a once-every-three-years routine for CIA personnel). He was found to be deceptive on questions regarding his drug usage and theft. Five months later, Howard, who had relocated to his New Mexico birthplace, traveled to the Soviet Consulate in DC and gave them a letter of introduction, in which he stated that he was a disgruntled ex-CIA employee. Over the next year and a half, he repeatedly visited Vienna, Austria, where he supposedly had contacts with KGB handlers.
By 1984, then drinking heavily, Howard told a number of former colleagues that he had “been fucked” by the Agency. It got back to HQ that Howard, who was living in El Dorado, near Santa Fe, was not only drinking but admitting to his Soviet Consulate visit—a toxic combination for the CIA, which hadn’t yet known about the Vienna trips. Howard possessed too many of the Agency’s most closely held secrets about Moscow Station.
But perhaps the greatest loss was the highly classified asset Edward Lee Howard had been preparing to handle. On June 13, 1985, engineer/asset Tolkachev missed his scheduled meeting with case officer Paul “Skip” Stombaugh. Instead of passing a cache to Tolkachev, Skip was arrested by KGB agents at the drop site and taken to Lubyanka Prison. Tolkachev had been arrested weeks earlier and taken to Lefortovo Prison, to be executed a year later.
This was all playing out at the same time temporary KGB turncoat, Gennady’s colleague, Vitaly Yurchenko was cooperating with the CIA. He not only informed them that Ronald Pelton had given up Operation Ivy Bells;* he also had SE Division chief Burton Gerber (a constant thorn in Jack Platt’s side, and vice versa) convinced that Jack’s pipeliner Edward Lee Howard was working to help the KGB blow up Moscow Station. Yurchenko was persuasive, but the CIA had another problem child. Howard’s best friend at the Agency, Bill Bosch—who had been fired one year after Howard for currency fraud and incompetence at the Bolivia Station—was reporting some disturbing information about Howard back to his former employer. The men had stayed in close touch, and at one get-together, Howard had suggested the two buddies, both unfairly dismissed, should get revenge. With a strategy employed twenty years earlier by Lee Harvey Oswald, Howard planned to go to the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City and tell them everything he knew about the Central Intelligence Agency. Bosch said he’d have to think it over. Instead he got word to the SE Division that Howard’s drinking was escalating and he was suggesting a joint espionage caper.
In August 1985, now armed with the vital news, Jack warned Lane Crocker and others at the Washington Field Office that Howard had taken the IOC course, so only the FBI’s best personnel had a chance of catching him if he made a dash. Local field office agents dispatched from Albuquerque began watching the Howards from a distance, usually through electronic surveillance aimed at their home. On September 10, the Bureau learned from Howard’s psychiatrist that he would likely crack under the pressure of an interrogation. Along with a half dozen other Washington-based agents, Dion Rankin, a seasoned interrogator and polygrapher, packed his bags for the trip to New Mexico.
Two CIA officers were also packing their bags. One was Howard’s former supervisor at SE, Tom Mills, whom Howard respected, though in his enraged state after being fired, Howard had screamed at him in Mills’s driveway. Mills was designated to convince Howard to cooperate with the Bureau. The other Agency man going west was Cowboy Jack Platt, assigned to use his special rapport with Mary to convince her to do the same. Additionally, since Jack knew both the Howards, his expertise might prove critical in predicting their response. Plus, for Jack it was a chance to be in a place where his personal dress code was both appropriate and accepted.
Dion studied the Howard case file and spent many hours preparing his polygraph questions for Bosch and the Howards before meeting Jack at Dulles Airport. “Jack and I flew down to Albuquerque together,” says Dion. “The plan was for me to polygraph Edward, then fly down to South Padre Island, Texas, to do Bosch. Jack would stay with the team in Santa Fe and babysit Mary.” On September 19, 1985, two agents called Howard and asked him to come to the Hilton Hotel in Santa Fe so they could talk. Meeting him in the lobby, the FBI men took him up to room 327, which shared a wall with room 329, where Dion and Jack waited silently with another agent for the signal to come next door to conduct the polygraph.
Ears to the wall, Jack and Dion heard the discussion quickly escalate, as Howard began screaming at his inquisitors, refusing to be polygraphed. Clearly his drinking and bitterness over his dismissal—or perhaps the prospect of being caught spying—had him on the edge. “Howard got so aggressive that the other agent in our room pulled out his gun,” remembers Dion. “He had it inadvertently aimed at my stomach. Jack and I made him holster it before one of us got shot accidentally. We laughed about that for years.” Jack and Dion stayed in their room until it was clear that Howard had left the scene.
Later that day, Howard actually bumped into a member of the FBI’s surveillance team in a Santa Fe supermarket. He was now calm, telling the agent that he was willing to discuss another meeting. The startled agent advised Howard that his hotel interrogators were waiting for him back at the Hilton. In a brief preliminary encounter at the hotel, Howard said he’d take the polygraph on Monday (four days later), but he would be lawyering up over the weekend. The agents breathed a sigh of relief, believing they had just scored a breakthrough.
That night, Dion took a three-hour flight to Texas with local FBI agent Bill Koopman to polygraph Bill Bosch, while Jack stayed behind in Santa Fe, continuing to observe Howard and advise the Bureau. On Saturday, Dion and Koopman spent eight hours questioning, and ultimately polygraphing, Bosch at the Bahia Mar Resort on South Padre Island. “We told him about how one of our assets, whom Howard had handled in Moscow, had just been executed in that same city,” Dion remembers. “He admitted everything. He told us about how Howard admitted to accepting money from the KGB in Europe and about how Howard wanted Bosch to join him in the espionage.” Toward the end of the long day, Bosch began to fall apart under the strain. “He began hyperventilating, became almost hysterical,” says Dion. “But we had already poly’d him, and he passed easily.” Dion relayed the news to Lane Crocker at the Washington Field Office, and Crocker set the arrest for Monday—two days were needed to acquire the warrant. But that would prove two days too late, as Howard was already on the run. 
That very Saturday night, the Howards enlisted their regular babysitter to watch their two-year-old son, Lee, while the couple went out to dinner. That was a cover story. In truth, the pair had spent the previous night rehearsing every evasion trick they had learned from Jack. After Edward Howard kissed his son goodbye, possibly forever, he and Mary drove away, and by sheer happenstance, their Bureau minders were looking the other way.
Wrongly assuming that the G-men were on their tail, and with Mary at the wheel, the husband and wife spies left their home at 4:30 and proceeded to have that last dinner. From there a tearful Mary drove her husband to a drop-off point they had scouted earlier in the day. The drive from the restaurant was a master class in the evasion techniques Jack had taught them in their time as Zephyrs: creating a “gap” in surveillance with hours of driving, the jack-in-a-box (JIB), and the moving car delivery (MCD) in order to lose the Bureau’s best surveillance team. Of course, no one was actually following them, so it was doubly embarrassing for Edward when he jumped from the moving car and almost broke his arm. Mary deployed the JIB and returned home. US authorities never laid eyes on Edward Lee Howard again.
Still reeling from the knowledge that one of his trainees had betrayed his country, causing the execution of a good man and a priceless asset in Moscow (Piguzov), in addition to Tolkachev, Jack spent the next few days with Dion, hoping to learn that the woman Jack had bonded with and believed in was not also a traitor. While Jack called Mary and asked her to meet him at the High Mesa Inn, Dion prepared his questions for the polygraph session. Mary, who arrived with her mother, didn’t agree to a polygraph right away, but eventually, with Jack and a female FBI agent flown in from Los Angeles reassuring her, she relented. Additionally, she likely knew that if she failed to cooperate, Lee might be left with no parents at all. “Once she had relaxed, Mary told me everything,” Dion says, adding that she passed the polygraph test easily.
After Mary opened up, she became a dream witness, giving up details that Jack, Dion, and the rest could never have anticipated. One evening, she mentioned that Edward possessed a Swiss bank account and had made a large deposit ($150,000, the Bureau would later learn from Swiss sources). Did she have the account number? No. Anything else? Yes. Mary said she was with him when he buried an emergency stash in the New Mexico desert, and it should still be there. She could take them there sometime if they’d like. The agents responded in unison: “We’re going now.”
Dion remembers driving at around eleven at night in the pitch-blackness of a moonless desert night across a small stream with Mary pointing the way to a particular tree. One team member had brought a small shovel, and Dion held a flashlight. According to author David Wise, who interviewed Mary for his book The Spy Who Got Away, Mary was sobbing as the agent broke ground. He dug for only a few minutes when he hit upon a green military ammo box, crammed full of silver bars, US currency in varied denominations, Canadian coins, and two gold Krugerrands, all totaling about $10,000. Dion remembered that it also held an envelope containing a deposit slip bearing the number of the Swiss bank account.
Before jetting back to Washington, Jack and Dion experienced another mini drama with Mary. In one of their last conversations, she disclosed that her husband had told her she would hear from him at a specific time, at a specific place, a few days after his MCD jump. Neither Jack nor Dion recall the exact day, but the place was a telephone booth in a park near her home where the couple often played with little Lee. When the phone rang precisely on time, Dion squeezed into the booth with Mary and put his ear up to the receiver. Dion can’t say for certain, but he thinks Jack had his ear up against the glass booth.
“He’s with us” was all that was spoken from the other end, in a distinctive Russian accent. In fact, Edward Howard wasn’t in Russia yet. He was just beginning a nine-month, nine-country odyssey, looking for a place to land. The route, according to Howard, went like this: Tucson, New York, Copenhagen, Frankfurt, Munich, Helsinki, Latin America for six months under an assumed name, Vienna, Budapest, and finally Moscow in June 1986.
Jack and Dion returned to New Mexico in late October 1985 to make certain they had obtained everything Mary could offer. Once again she was polygraphed, and once again she passed. Soon came the question of whether to charge Mary as an accomplice. Jack had long ago concluded that Mary was a good person trapped in a bad place with an alcoholic. Knowing a thing or two about alcoholics himself, Jack lobbied forcefully on Mary’s behalf. “She was the codependent of an alcoholic and she got caught up in his craziness,” Jack remembered. “She was a victim. We had to let her go. Plus she had a child to raise.” Jack added that Edward Lee Howard had been a handful, given the reports he received about his attitude and performance both at The Farm and in the SE Division. Mary was never charged.
In 1983, Howard had been psychologically destroyed by his failure to ever make it to Moscow for the CIA, especially after two years of rigorous preparation. When he finally got there in 1986, it was courtesy of the KGB. In exile, the man Jack had trained coincidentally spent a good deal of his leisure time playing volleyball at Gennady’s former home, the KGB’s Dynamo Sports complex. After a few visits to Edward in Moscow, Mary eventually divorced him in 1996. Jack continued to stay in touch with her for years to come. Howard died at age fifty on July 12, 2002, breaking his neck in what some consider a mysterious fall. Dion Rankin, remembering what Jack had told him about Howard being a handful, is among the suspicious: “I think he was pushed,” having outlived his usefulness.
Until the end of his life, and in his memoir Safe House, Howard proclaimed his innocence, asserting that he was outed by Yurchenko in order to waste precious FBI and CIA resources so that a real double agent—or double agents—would go undetected. To which Jack said, “Bullshit. The fucking quisling sold out the entire Moscow Station for $150,000. He gave up everyone’s true identity, including the asset [Vladimir Piguzov, or JOGGER] who gave me the initial background dossier on Gennady.” Jack’s anger was aggravated by his strong hunch that there was another US double agent out there.
Soon after Howard vanished in 1985, Jack pranced into Burton Gerber’s office to deliver one terse sentence about Howard before turning on his boot heel: “I told you I knew how to fucking train people.”
