Chapter 1: Apprentice Spies
 
Forced recruitment almost never works because you’ve got somebody against their will and they resent it.
 —Jack “Cowboy” Platt, CIA case officer 

August 27, 2005,* Great Falls, VA 

Oh no, not again, Cowboy thought. 
Hanging up the phone, sixty-nine-year-old retired CIA case officer Jack “Cowboy” Platt recalled something F. Scott Fitzgerald had written about “the dark night of the soul,” and now he knew exactly what it meant. 
Sitting in his darkened den in Northern Virginia, Platt stared at a photo of himself together with the subject of the call, his Russian “younger brother” and former KGB man Gennady “Genya” Vasilenko. 
The framed memento had been taken during a recent Shenandoah Valley hunting trip. 
Better times, for sure. 
Tonight’s communication had changed everything and tempted Jack to drive to a location he hadn’t visited in twenty-five years: the ABC Liquor Store just down the road from CIA headquarters in McLean. 
The bottle had come closer to killing him than the Soviets ever did.
Platt looked at his left hand, mangled by a grenade that had malfunctioned during his stint in the Marines, and thought, Jesus Christ, Gennady was probably cursing me out as they tortured him. 
The thought was intolerable, because it was Jack’s fault. 
It was his scheme that had brought them to this. 
Tipped off by Gennady’s son on the phone call from Russia, Jack then read the sickening details on the Internet. 
His “best laid plan,” which had quietly succeeded in rolling up one of the United States’ most damaging traitors ever, had blown up in the worst way: Gennady, coincidentally known to his peers as “Russian Cowboy,” had been rounded up and imprisoned in Moscow for the second time. 
And it was Jack’s fault—again.
In a notorious Moscow hellhole of a prison, confused and terrified, sixty-three-year-old Gennady also recalled his hunting trips with Cowboy. 
Two days earlier, on the first day of hunting season in the woods surrounding Moscow, he had been at his rural dacha with his mother; his girlfriend, Masha; and their young children, his second family. 
As the country celebrated its annual Moscow Days, Gennady was in the front yard “playing with the kids” when he caught sight of ten or so black-clad Spetsnaz encircling his property. 
I am about to become the first victim of hunting season, Gennady thought. 
As he reached out to shake hands with the sheriff, an acquaintance, the commandos pounced, beating the pulp out of him and breaking his knee in front of his hysterical mother, girlfriend, and children. 
“If you step one inch in any direction, we’ll shoot you in front of them,” one guard snarled. 
Then they hauled him off to hell.
Hell for Gennady came in many waves. 
First he was taken to the local police station, where he was told that illegal explosives had been found at his apartment. 
All the residences of his immediate family had been ransacked. 
The troops had “found” more explosives in Gennady’s homes and cars. 
In fact, the evidence had been planted to frame up the arrest. 
They even had been secretly coating his car with invisible explosive particles so he would have residue on his fingers. 
For the icing on the cake, the FSB had planted World War II–era explosives in Gennady’s garage so they could charge him with terrorism.
Finding him at the police station, his oldest son, thirty-five-year-old Ilya, brought him a change of clothes from home, but the only jacket Gennady had at the dacha was the one Cowboy’s FBI friend Dion Rankin had given him years before, the blue one emblazoned with FBI ACADEMY. 
Just perfect, thought Gennady. 
They already think I’m with the Americans. 
He was so anxious to take off his bloodstained T-shirt that he put the FBI sweatshirt on anyway. 
“Fuck ’em,” he said, uttering Cowboy’s favorite curse, which Gennady had appropriated years earlier.
When FSB thugs came into the room to soften him up with continued beatings, Gennady knew this was not about old gunpowder or boxes of hunting bullets. 
It was about vengeance. 
Concussed, he began vomiting and bleeding on his FBI sweatshirt. 
Drifting in and out of consciousness, lying in a pool of his own blood, he realized that today was his daughter Julia’s birthday.
Assuming their captive was now sufficiently pliable to an admission, the goons got around to the real reason for the brutality: they wanted Gennady to confess to helping the US ferret out an American traitor four years earlier—perhaps the Russians’ most valuable double agent ever. 
The Russian bureaucracy was in damage-control mode since the asset’s exposure, and they couldn’t just allow those who they thought facilitated the hard-won spy’s arrest to get away unscathed. 
They had to send a message, and Gennady was that message.
The beatings and mental torture were unending. 
Throughout it, the police, and later the FSB, had one question: “How did your American boyfriend turn you into a traitor?” And the answer was always the same.
“Yebat’ sebya! Ya ne predatel’!” yelled Gennady. 
Go fuck yourself! I’m not a traitor!
March 1979, Washington, DC 

When you’re up to your ass in alligators, it’s very difficult to remember that the initial objective was to drain the swamp.
 —A sign on Cowboy Jack Platt’s desk at CIA headquarters 

Jack remembered racing down Washington’s Capital Beltway in an alcoholic fury to meet the “target” for the first time at a Harlem Globetrotters game, having likely already pounded down his typical twelve to fourteen beers for the day. 
Appropriate, he figured, because this possible recruit he was going to meet was a hard-partying Russian and the best lead the CIA’s domestic station had had in a while.
Thirty-seven-year-old Gennady Vasilenko was the new KGB man in town, the son-in-law of one of the godfathers of the Soviet hydrogen bomb, Vladimir Goncharov, and the game these days was all about nuclear war: preventing it in the best case, starting it first if need be, and finding ways to survive it. 
Both sides believed it was going to happen, too, to the point where Soviet agents were assigned to drive around Washington at night to see if and when an inordinate number of lights appeared to be on in the White House and the Pentagon, in theory betraying an uptick in activity and perhaps indicating an imminent attack. 
Jack’s mission—his actual job description at the CIA—was to “turn” Soviet agents stationed in the US, to get them to betray their country by giving the Americans military and political intelligence, especially as it related to nuclear secrets. 
Jack had been at this assignment for about a year and hadn’t flipped anybody.
“In almost sixty-five percent of the cases, the prime motivation [to turn] was revenge,” Jack would reflect in retirement. 
His conclusion was drawn from a study of fifty traitors he had undertaken for the Agency. 
“Revenge for a true wrong or a perception in his or her head that something terrible had been done to him or her by that system and ‘I’ll make ’em pay.’” Other methods, of course, included the tried-and-true blackmail over a target’s weaknesses, the big three being sex, gambling, and booze. 
However, in the thirty years of the CIA’s existence, the Americans had almost no success in turning KGB agents in Washington, despite having much to offer. 
The Soviets met with similar frustration. 
Former KGB agent Yuri Shvets estimated that for every two thousand approaches, only one was successful.
“Failure is the norm,” Jack said, and what he lacked in number of recruits, he made up for in quality throughout his career. 
“Not one of the people I recruited ever got caught.” Jack never resorted to the blackmail technique; it wasn’t his style. 
“Forced recruitment almost never works, because you’ve got someone against their will, and they resent it. 
You have to re-recruit them every time. 
Besides, with a forced recruitment, there’s a damned good chance that the target just goes back to his boss and tells him what happened.” (Nonetheless, Jack and his CIA recruitment team had already created a generic list of vulnerabilities using the acronym MECMAFO: Money hungry, Ego, Criminal acts, Midlife crisis, Addiction, Family trouble, and Outcast loners.)
The few notorious blackmail operations that actually succeeded got blown out of proportion in spy folklore, Jack explained. 
“Everybody knows the story of the British foreign service officer who liked little boys,” referring to the trope that most spying is rooted in blackmail. 
“Okay, fine. 
That’s one case when the KGB got somebody that way, but everybody goes back to that one case! It’s not the norm.” Jack added that violent persuasions to turn a source are equally fanciful. 
“In twenty-six years in the CIA I never carried a gun.”
A native of San Antonio, Texas, John “Jack” Cheney Platt III was born on February 18, 1936, at Nix Hospital. 
Jack inherited not only his family’s devotion to military service but also their gene for alcoholism, experiencing frequent blackouts until a successful rehab stint in his forties. 
“My grandfather was an alcoholic, my father was an alcoholic, his brother, and my mother had three nervous breakdowns,” Jack recalled. 
“They had cocktails every night before dinner. 
My sister, Polly, and I snuck sips in the kitchen when we were kids. 
She died an alcoholic. 
I didn’t stand a chance. 
I was a beer-aholic. 
A twelve-pack a day guy, minimum.”
Jack’s only sibling, younger sister (by three years) Mary Marr “Polly” Platt, grew up to be an Oscar-nominated art director and production executive. 
Married for a time to director Peter Bogdanovich, she also became the first woman inducted into the Art Directors Guild.* Despite their divergent politics—Jack a growling Texas conservative and Polly a show-business liberal—the siblings adored each other and were best friends. 
Their relationship was reminiscent of that between To Kill a Mockingbird’s tomboy, Scout, and her brother, Jem, each child protecting the other from neighborhood predators. 
In her unpublished memoir, Polly recalled smashing a local boy in the shins with a shovel when he caught Jack off guard in a street scuffle. 
Even as aging parents and grandparents, they were known to reenact creative renditions of their childhood, making spectacles of themselves. 
Jack’s daughter Leigh tells how they would go to restaurants and start whining like small children, banging utensils: “Weeeeee’re huuunnngrryyyyy!” 
The sibling bond had a darker side as well. 
Polly’s and Jack’s children all recall watching in horror as the two got rip-roaring, falling-down drunk together in Paris. 
“They fell into a hedge of rose bushes and came out bleeding profusely,” remembers Polly’s daughter Antonia Bogdanovich. 
“The bloody mess only made them laugh harder.”
Their parents were New Yorker John Cheney Platt II, a career army officer, and Vivian Hildreth Marr, of Newburyport, Massachusetts. 
During World War I, Platt Sr. left his undergraduate studies at MIT, where he had been a champion boxer and a brilliant student, to enlist in the army. 
Early in his military stint, Platt Sr. was dispatched to Mexico, where he engaged José Doroteo Arango Arámbula, aka Pancho Villa. 
For the next three decades, Colonel Platt and his family were posted to places like New Jersey, California, Illinois, and Texas as Platt gained a reputation as a noted court-martial judge. 
After World War II, Platt was sent to Bremerhaven, Germany, during the occupation, where he was in charge of two thousand German POWs, many from Erwin Rommel’s Afrika Korps. 
He returned to Germany for another tour from 1949 to 1951, during which he was a judge in the Dachau trials. 
He was also a judge in the famous Hesse crown jewels heist, in which a US colonel stole items valued at $2.5 million ($30 million today). 
 Young Jack was well aware of his father’s service and what, to Jack, was a noble battle for justice against a monstrous enemy. 
Sometimes there really were battles between good and evil, and there was no doubt in Jack’s mind that his father’s—and the United States’—work to bring down tyranny was such a battle.
“I actually believed what President Kennedy meant when he said ‘Ask not what your country can do for you,’” Jack explained, adding that his early experiences overseas also had a profound effect. 
“I’m a proud, unreconstructed patriot who knows it’s a privilege to be an American citizen.”
Vivian Platt suffered from acute mental illness for much of her life and spent serious time in mental health institutions, having the first of her nervous breakdowns when the family was stationed in Germany. 
“Polly judged her mother harshly and blamed her for being weak,” according to an article in Premiere. 
“I realize now,” Polly told the magazine, “that perhaps my mother had not fulfilled her own promise, her own gifts—and she was living in a world where that was not even considered.” Still, Polly described life with her mother as excruciating; the Platt children never knew when their mother would erupt and begin torturing their father over some triviality, such as the way he carved roast beef. 
Even worse, according to Polly’s daughter Sashy Bogdanovich, Vivian once willfully drove off a bridge—with young Polly in the car. 
Not only a likely suicide attempt but also one without regard for her child. 
The children of alcoholics and wildly unstable parents are known for seeking to control all possible variables in a world they come to see as capricious and treacherous. 
With Platt Sr., who died of cirrhosis and emphysema, and Vivian, who experienced a grotesque death of alcoholism, Jack and Polly got a double dose and managed the aftershocks for the rest of their lives.
Polly had vivid memories of postwar Germany, a place filled with the smoldering ruins of conflict. 
Their father took young Jack and Polly on a tour of the Dachau concentration camp “so we’d never forget what happened there,” Jack said. 
Seeing such landscapes, Polly said, “I started fantasizing that I had these incredible powers, that I could rebuild all the broken buildings.” Both Jack and Polly, in their future careers, would be known as caring, team players. 
“There’s a tradition in the Platt family for bringing home the wounded,” Jack said. 
Platt Sr. lived long enough to see Neil Armstrong’s shoes find their rightful American footing on the moon in 1969—an expressed goal—and died soon afterward in Polly’s guest house in California, she having made good on a promise to never put him in an assisted-living facility.
In the early 1950s, the Platt family relocated to Hingham, Massachusetts, where Jack’s father, by now known as a gifted man with a drinking problem, worked for the city of Boston as a consultant on the civil defense staff, making contingency plans for dealing with fallout from a first-strike nuclear attack. 
Jack went to Phillips Academy in Andover in 1953 and, from there, to Williams College (in Williamstown) on a full scholarship, the alma mater of a number of CIA vets, later including Director Richard Helms. 
In the ’50s and ’60s, Williams was still an all-male “Little Ivy” school, consistently ranked among the top five colleges in the country. 
Ninety percent of the students were pledged to a fraternity, a system that was abolished in the late ’60s. 
The drinking age in Massachusetts was twenty-one, so weekend road trips across the nearby state lines into New York and Vermont, where eighteen was the rule, were a regularity, and Jack was often the wheelman. 
When beer wasn’t the quest, girls were, with Jack leading “panty raids” on Bennington and Sarah Lawrence colleges.
Simultaneously, Jack began to inhabit his cowboy persona. 
He was a student who, according to one friend, “could drink more than any of us.” Classmate David Grossman described the school as having 250 students in each grade, but Jack stood out. 
He majored in history, with an emphasis on Russian studies, and consistently made the dean’s list. 
“I didn’t even know him, but I knew of him,” Grossman says. 
“Jack was known as a hot ticket, a rough rider, and a tough guy. 
But at the same time, everybody seemed to like him.” Classmate Joe Albright refers to him as “the wild one at school.” Albright remembers one typical “Jack story”: during a pledge-week party, an inebriated Jack Platt drove his motorcycle into his frat house, the infamous Phi Gamma Delta, up the stairs to the second floor, most assuredly to grab another six-pack. 
Classmates began referring to the boot-wearing San Antonio native as “Cowboy.”
Phi Gamma Delta’s president and Jack’s lifelong friend Carl Vogt (who later became Williams’s president) remembers Jack as being the anonymous architect behind some of the greatest pranks in Williams’s history, covert ops that presaged his career as the CIA’s master of surveillance avoidance—only Carl and one other friend ever knew who had pulled off the stunts. 
At the time, students were allowed only three unexcused class absences, and the school maintained the precious “cut list” in a binder kept in a secure room in the Hopkins Hall administration building. 
According to Carl, Jack obtained the blueprints for the underground steam pipe system that ran between all the campus buildings, and late one night, he managed to squeeze into the pipeline and traverse it into Hopkins Hall, where he made off with the cut list for all one thousand undergrads. 
Jack then drove the binder to his favorite New York bar, where he burned the pages in the parking lot.
Then there was the time when the iconic First Congregational Church in the center of town had its seven-story steeple vandalized. 
A mysterious person (Jack Platt) had climbed up to the large clock on the steeple and removed all the large gold numerals except for the randy 6 and 9. 
Or the time when a vintage 1925 fire truck in Bennington was pushed down Route 7 from behind by someone’s car (Jack’s) all the way to the Phi Gamma Delta frat house thirteen miles away. 
The FBI, called in due to the interstate nature of the crime, was not amused. 
Jack, then a junior, was fined thirty-five dollars by local authorities. 
It was one of the only bits of mischief in which Jack was identified.
Although Jack possessed an impish sense of humor, he was so laid-back that he attained the nickname “The Rock.” He was also known as the smartest guy in the class; he took meticulous—and illustrated—notes, which he lent out to his lucky pals. 
He was generous not only with his notes but also with his compassion: as pledge chairman, he supported Carl’s move to open the pledging to black students.
While at Williams, Jack studied with Robert G. Waite, a pioneering teacher who had a great influence on Jack and his classmates. 
Waite, a psycho-historian specializing in Adolf Hitler, caused intense controversy with his The Psychopathic God: Adolf Hitler (1977) because he attempted to suspend his moral judgment whenever possible, even if the topic demanded otherwise. 
Later in life, Jack applied Waite’s method when working with spies from the hated Red Menace, the USSR. 
He already knew he would enter the Marines after graduation, having spent two summers in the Platoon Leaders Class (PLC) cadet program, where he consistently ranked number one among his forty-four fellow cadets.
Jack missed his 1958 Williams graduation ceremony because he got into a serious car accident while chauffeuring three fraternity brothers on a road trip to Saratoga Springs, New York. 
He was most likely visiting his sister Polly, a student at Skidmore College who regularly arranged dates for his friends. 
To avoid an oncoming car, Jack swerved and hit a tree on Route 9. 
Three of the four men were hospitalized, Jack included. 
The car was totaled.
In June 1959, Cowboy married Paige Gordon, a cousin of a cousin, whom he met at a party at about the same time he received a commission as a second lieutenant in the United States Marine Corps. 
“I thought he was okay,” Paige says with characteristic wryness, but she really started liking Cowboy when she saw how others in their circle responded to his impish sense of humor. 
Today, slender with short dark hair, Paige looks much younger than a woman in her late seventies. 
She conveys precisely where she stands with either a clear expression or an economy of words that complemented Cowboy’s rowdiness. 
From a young age, the Platt girls referred to their parents as “Lady and the Tramp.” Paige was raised by her mother and stepfather in Armonk, New York, on a farm that her family eventually sold to IBM to build its headquarters. 
Her biological father, Arthur Gordon, was an author and ghostwriter for the legendary motivational figure Norman Vincent Peale. 
Her mother was very kind when she wasn’t drinking, Paige remembers, but died of alcoholism—a fate that would later prove to be pivotal in how Paige managed her life with her husband.

Jack was assigned to the Marine corps base at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, as an intelligence officer in 3rd Battalion, Kilo Company. 
According to Jack’s lifelong friend Major General Matt “Matty” Caulfield, this was an amphibious task force that often conducted exercises in the Mediterranean Sea. 
Jack’s key responsibility was prepping and commanding a beachhead assault team. 
His meticulous field reports saw him promoted in early 1962 to recon leader of Alpha Company, 2nd Recon Battalion. 
“Jack and I hit it off instantly,” says Caulfield. 
“I never met a man like him before. 
He was terrific in the field, never got lost. 
Jack had a great relationship with the troops. 
They took to him in a way I’ve never seen before.” Once during cold-weather training in Pisgah National Forest in North Carolina, Jack rescued an entire company from a blizzard. 
A quarter of them got frostbite, but they all survived. 
Caulfield says Jack should have gotten an award for this rescue.
At Camp Lejeune in 1961, three years into Jack’s four-year career in the Marines, a flare grenade exploded in his hand, costing Jack his left middle finger to the first knuckle (later, as a spy, he often wore one black glove to hide this obvious identifying characteristic from the enemy, a habit that conjures up images of Peter Sellers’s Dr. 
Strangelove, a fictional player in the nuclear game). 
Caulfield adds some color to the incident, explaining that Jack was such a committed instructor he kept his own unused inflammatory devices for improvisational use during training. 
These “pyros” he felt were necessary to train his students properly. 
He had ripped them off and kept them in a hidden locker, buried somewhere unknown to anybody else. 
A flare grenade went off accidentally one day when he was retrieving his stash. 
Early in their relationship, Jack told Gennady that he got the injury in a showdown with Carlos the Jackal. 
Gennady didn’t believe him and could tell that Jack didn’t believe it either when it came out of his own mouth. 
In October 1962, one year after Jack’s first child, daughter Leigh, was born, the Cuban missile crisis almost incinerated everything Jack held dear. 
During the nuclear brinksmanship, Jack was a first lieutenant in a Marine reconnaissance battalion off the Cuban coast, ready to scream ashore if and when President Kennedy gave the order. 
His job was to provide the broader US military with the intelligence needed to pulverize the Cuban—or Russian—military into submission five thousand yards from the beach inland. 
He fully expected he would be engaged in combat in Cuba when the missiles started flying.
Before he embarked from Camp Lejeune for Cuban waters, young Jack had told Paige that nuclear war was a strong likelihood. 
He added that, given what he knew about nuclear war, it wasn’t worth worrying about too much because it would be over faster than the human mind could process. 
The war he would face in Cuba, however, was a different story. 
That would be a conventional engagement, and those could be long and bloody.
Caulfield had a different take on what would have happened in a shooting war based on what he later learned. 
He says Jack’s battalion was excited about the possibility of a firefight on Cuban shores. 
What they didn’t know was that there were twenty thousand Soviet soldiers and tactical nukes on the island. 
Jack’s platoon would have been annihilated.
While they were training for the big Cuban engagement on Vieques Island, Jack defied orders and surreptitiously made off with better weapons than those he had been ordered to take. 
Jack and Caulfield were recalled to Camp Lejeune for disciplinary action just as everybody else was heading south during the missile crisis. 
However, once the general was given the full picture, he chewed out the officer who had moronically ordered them to use inferior weapons in the first place. 
Jack and Caulfield turned around and headed south to Florida just as the crisis receded.
After the Cuban missile crisis, Jack returned to Camp Lejeune, and to Paige and baby Leigh, to decompress and contemplate his post-Marines career. 
He soon had a life-changing conversation with his favorite uncle, Dick Platt Jr., also a former Marine, as well as a member of Yale’s Skull and Bones, a secret society known for its links to the American intelligence community. 
During a Christmas 1962 exchange, Dick mentioned that because of the empathy Jack demonstrated for his Marine trainees, he might not be capable of invoking the extreme discipline needed in the field and therefore would likely not see advancements in a military career. 
Dick Platt then suggested a relatively new organization, the Central Intelligence Agency, where Jack might thrive, especially with his having lived overseas and his language skills: German and, to lesser degree, Russian. 
At the time, Jack wasn’t quite sure what the CIA was. 
Nevertheless, in 1964, Jack applied and was accepted as a case officer recruit at the CIA.
