Chapter 11 - A Second Reunion
 
Why did you sell me out?

Gennady finally obtained his own passport and US travel visa and journeyed to Washington in the summer of 1992. Jack and Dion had been counting the days with a not small dose of trepidation.
“Jack and I met Gennady at Dulles and went back to Jack’s house,” remembers Dion. “We all stayed there for a few days.” Gennady had been cordial at the airport but uncharacteristically cool, far from the quick-to-hug friend they were accustomed to. It was clear he was seething inside.
Indeed he was. Gennady wanted badly to confront Jack about his ordeal, but he knew he couldn’t do it at the airport. Part of him felt as if he might explode, and the airport was no place for such antics. In the car, his head was a confusion of nerves and acute emotions. What words would he choose to confront Jack with, and how could he expect to get answers if the only words he could think of were curses? But despite his rage, Gennady also felt something else: a visceral sense of joy and comfort in seeing his old friend. His own brain no longer made any sense to him.
“That night we were in the kitchen with Genya, talking about it, trying to figure out just how he had been compromised,” says Dion. “It got tense.”
“Why did you sell me out? Was that the plan from the beginning?” Gennady implored. He wasn’t yelling, but his voice broke. More than a quarter century later, Gennady’s eyes well up as he recounts this showdown.
Jack was wounded but not shocked. He had had an agitated sense that this confrontation would come. And he didn’t blame Gennady in the least, given what he had been through. “What would I gain from hurting you?” Jack shot back. “Since when did I cultivate a taste for helping the KGB? Semper fi, baby. I’m a fucking Marine, and I love my country, just like you love yours.”
“Were you recording me?” Gennady asked. 
“Of course not,” Jack answered firmly. “You know how I feel about having my fieldwork second-guessed by a seventh-floor suit.”
“Did you say you recruited me?” Gennady asked. Jack said that he hadn’t. That Gennady wasn’t yelling made Jack feel worse, guiltier as opposed to instinctively defensive. Gennady’s tone was more akin to an injured brother than a sworn ideological enemy. For his part, Gennady had never seen Jack this way—distressed, not his usual irreverent self. Jack explained that he had never claimed either verbally or in his reports that Gennady had been a recruit; he simply had reported that they met on occasion and Gennady was a contact, not a spy. There was a fundamental difference, as Gennady well knew. Jack could only wonder if the KGB had some other reason for wanting to scapegoat his Russian friend.
Jack completely dropped any remaining Marine exterior as tears welled up in earnest. “Jesus Christ, Genya, you’re the brother I never had. I would never, could never…”
Suddenly, Gennady hugged his old friend like he had before he was arrested. Jack was crying and Gennady and Dion were close to it.
“I missed you guys so much,” the Russian said as all three men seemed to exhale simultaneously.
As the week came to a close, Dion drove Gennady down to Macon for the weekend before his return to Russia. Before leaving, Gennady gave Jack a copy of his prison release document as a gift. It was his certification to Jack that he didn’t believe Jack had betrayed him, a sacrament of forgiveness.
 
Gennady had many mouths to feed and a new career he was creating out of thin air. Coincidentally, Cowboy Jack was in a similar, if not as immediate, quandary. He had retired too young and still needed to contribute to his and Paige’s expenses. By this time, the girls were grown and on their own, but their college loans remained. In one of their phone calls, Gennady explained to Jack how the joint-venture business was exploding in Moscow. It occurred to Jack that, with their combined contacts in the ex-spy world, they should be able to create a thriving enterprise. Jack’s partners at HTG agreed and soon a joint venture between Bullit and HTG was born.
One of the new company’s selling points was that, through Gennady’s old KGB network, it had easy access to FSB men who facilitated the granting of passports. HTG could now expedite travel for potential Russian business partners. More importantly, HTG was able to vet Russian partners for wary American investors. As Harry Gossett points out, “Russia didn’t exactly have a Better Business Bureau whose files you could check.”
 
In 1993, Jack made his first of five trips to Moscow, and Gennady continued coming to the US at least once a year. On Jack’s first trip, Gennady met him at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo International Airport and immediately noticed Jack’s apprehension. “I never wanted to come to Moscow,” Jack said. “I wanted to start a second life. Been there, done that. But when I saw, through Gennady, the opportunity through business to come to Moscow, I came. It’s very sad. It’s the only country that’s had five hundred years of bad luck.” Jack was also well aware that the FSB had to have a thick file on him. “I was fully prepared to be arrested,” Jack recalled. He told a chortling Gennady, “If I’m arrested, I’ll never speak to you again.” After a few days of Gennady watching his fellow Musketeer look over his shoulder, he pulled the car off to the side of the road and told his nervous friend, “Stop looking for it. It’s not there.”
Gennady also maintained frequent phone contact with Dion, back in Washington and Macon. When Gennady mentioned to Dion that his cash flow was still insufficient to provide for all his children, Dion drove to Atlanta to help him import high-quality cotton towels. Although hundreds of towels were sent over to Moscow, the gambit foundered quickly.
Also in 1993, Jack reconnected with journalist-publisher Joe Albright at their thirty-fifth Williams College reunion. Joe was the nephew of diplomat-philanthropist Harry Guggenheim, heir to the Guggenheim mining dynasty, and from one of the richest families in the world. The ex-husband of the first female secretary of state, Madeleine Albright, Joe was himself heir to a publishing empire that included the Chicago Tribune, Newsday, and the New York Daily News. He was now reporting from the Moscow branch of the Cox News Service, Jack well remembered.
Ever industrious, Jack prevailed upon Joe to write for Cox a profile of his and Gennady’s new joint venture. Working with his new wife, journalist Marcia Kunstel, Joe set to the task. How could he turn down such a fascinating story? Jack and Gennady’s unlikely friendship was made public for the first time when the story went to print in November 1993.
“The Cold War is truly done,” wrote Albright and Kunstel. “Their whole relationship is hard to imagine, even less easy to understand—how two men standing on opposite sides of the world’s most deadly geopolitical chasm could become chums, at the same time each was trying to lure the other to jump across.” Jack and Gennady had merely redirected their immense skill sets to “the battleground of international capitalism.”
The pair was most impressed with Gennady’s manifest charisma, writing, “The tall and graceful Russian, whose Harris tweeds and soft-spoken manner give him a professional air…” But they acknowledged that Jack had come up with the idea for the joint venture. Speaking of himself and Ben, Jack told them, “We’d done our homework. We knew what was there—minerals, resources. We knew Gennady had contacts.” Albright’s piece described the duo’s original meeting and the unlikelihood of their friendship and business partnership. However, Jack and Gennady weren’t ready as yet to divulge the details of their espionage work.
While the joint venture expanded its network of ex-spies, current spy Sandy Grimes, who along with Jeanne Vertefeuille headed up the CIA’s mole-hunting team, was zeroing in on Jack’s old colleague in SE, Aldrich “Rick” Ames. In the SE Division, Jack had worked with Ames, whom Jack had seen as more of a “street” operative, like himself; his oddball personality certainly wasn’t winning over many people at Langley. Jack had once assigned Ames a sensitive “handover,” a Yugoslav source in New York, and Ames had handled the assignment perfectly—Ames had seemed to be a part of the team.
However, the analyses of Grimes, Payne, and Worthen said otherwise. Worthen, who drove by the Ames house every day on the way to work, happened to notice expensive curtains going up in every window of the house. That seemingly minor observation led to a thorough investigation of Ames’s finances. Everything began to come into focus when the results pointed to big bank deposits ($15,000, $20,000, etc.) in the early 1980s on the very days—Grimes determined—when Ames officially had met KGB contacts from the Soviet Embassy, their names originally provided to the CIA by Gennady’s colleagues Motorin and Martynov. Although these contacts had been sanctioned as legitimate attempts by Ames to penetrate the embassy, in fact, he had used his work role as a cover for other—private—business that obviously paid extremely well. Additionally, bank records showed that Ames, who used to carpool to work with Grimes, acquired a new habit of making extremely large cash purchases, unbefitting the GS-14 paycheck of a CIA case officer (at that time $70,000): the cash purchase of a $540,000 house, the purchase of a new Jaguar sports car priced at $43,000, among others.
Nonetheless, CIA superiors of Grimes and Vertefeuille said they needed harder proof, noting that Rick had told his colleagues he had come into a large inheritance from the family of his Colombian wife, Rosario—an excuse that was impossible to verify or disprove. Some on the team concluded that Ames’s troubles all stemmed from the fact that he was trying to accommodate his wife’s lavish tastes. But Grimes and Vertefeuille weren’t buying either hypothesis.
Per regulation, the team’s conclusion had to be shared with the Bureau, which would write the report. When the report was issued in March 1993, Team Jeanne and Sandy had assumed it would name Ames as the prime suspect. When it named him only as being on a short list, they were crestfallen; they had wanted the Bureau to focus all its energy on Ames before he could flee the country. “When I read that report, it was one of the worst days of my life,” Sandy says.
Some in the CIA believed internal FBI politics, and perhaps no small measure of ego, led to the drafting of the ineffectual document. However, the team’s morale improved not long after the report was issued, when the CIA obtained new evidence that the Bureau couldn’t dismiss so easily. Here of Grimes and Vertefeuille’s memoir about the Ames affair, Circle of Treason, an oblique passage refers to something clearly too secret to amplify upon: “Luckily in 1993, additional information became available.” That’s it. Whatever it was, it “added to the comfort level of those who had not already been convinced.” In a recent presentation at Washington’s International Spy Museum, Grimes used the same phrase, almost verbatim. No one in the audience asked for an elucidation during the Q&A. In a recent conversation, Grimes expanded, if only slightly. It wasn’t just that the new evidence pointed to Ames; “It left no question that it was Ames.”
Perhaps something can be gleaned from the 2014 ABC series The Assets, which was based, albeit loosely, on Circle of Treason. In episode 8, “Avenger,” Grimes’s character is seen taking a meeting with a KGB source in Berlin called “Avenger,” who pointed the finger squarely at Ames, though without mentioning his name. Grimes recently denied any trips to Europe on the case but conceded that a critical new source did become available to the team. The AVENGER source was said to have been paid $2 million for the information. Most interestingly, one entire chapter of Grimes and Vertefeuille’s book was deleted by the Agency. It is known that it concerned Gennady Vasilenko. Gennady wasn’t AVENGER, although Gennady had known AVENGER since the mid-1970s, when both men worked at Yasenevo. Despite Grimes and her team knowing his name, the public’s answer to the AVENGER riddle, including his identity, would come in 2010.
When the damning information was shared with the FBI, they moved quickly to set up a full-bore investigation of Ames, called NIGHTMOVER, headed by supervisor Les Wiser Jr. Thanks to agents like Dion Rankin, Ames was already on the Bureau’s short list.*

Rick Ames and his wife, Rosario, were arrested on February 21, 1994. The newspapers and many forthcoming books would anoint the FBI’s Les Wiser as “the man who caught Aldrich Ames” when, in fact, Jeanne and Sandy’s team had had to lead the FBI by the nose to him. Ames cooperated and received a life sentence, but he was able to plea bargain a five-year sentence for his wife.
It was soon determined that Ames had started his spree in 1985 by selling out Gennady’s pals Motorin and Martynov for $25,000 each, and he continued selling secrets for the next nine years, amassing $4.2 million in total. In an interview with Tim Weiner of the New York Times soon after his arrest, Ames admitted that the main motive for his betrayal was money. But interestingly, he also faulted a culture flaw at the CIA that had similarly dogged Cowboy Jack. “I have had a kind of on-again, off-again binge drinking problem that occasionally reached the edge of scandal but never quite fell off,” Ames said. “I usually had several drinks before a meeting [with the Soviets]. I would drink during a meeting.” Each encounter saw the better part of a bottle of vodka disappear.

The CIA was less concerned with motive than with assessing the massive damage Ames had inflicted. In 1995, CIA director John Deutch summarized the harm caused by the turncoat:

    • In June 1985, he disclosed the identity of numerous US clandestine agents in the Soviet Union, at least nine of whom were executed. These agents were at the heart of our effort to collect intelligence and counterintelligence against the Soviet Union. As a result, we lost opportunities to better understand what was going on in the Soviet Union at a crucial time in history.
    • He disclosed, over the next decade, the identity of many US agents run against the Soviets, and later the Russians.
    • He disclosed the techniques and methods of double agent operations, details of our clandestine tradecraft, communication techniques, and agent validation methods. He went to extraordinary lengths to learn about US double agent operations and pass information on them to the Soviets.
    • He disclosed details about US counterintelligence activities that not only devastated our efforts at the time but also made us more vulnerable to KGB operations against us.
    • He identified CIA and other intelligence community personnel. (Ames contends that he disclosed personal information on, or the identities of, only a few American intelligence officials.) We do not believe that assertion.
    • He provided details of US intelligence technical collection activities and analytic techniques.
    • He provided finished intelligence reports, current intelligence reporting, arms control papers, and selected Department of State and Department of Defense cables. For example, during one assignment, he gave the KGB a stack of documents estimated to be fifteen to twenty feet high.

Cowboy Jack, predictably, cut to the chase: “Ames single-handedly wiped out twenty years’ worth of work. The combined efforts of people to develop the nine people he got killed in just seven pounds of paper.”
Whatever the root causes of Ames’s treachery, the effect was a staggering amount of damage. His capture raised the spirits of the entire US intelligence apparatus, though the feeling didn’t endure.
By sheer coincidence, Ames was arrested while Gennady was visiting Jack and Dion in Virginia, and the trio stayed glued to CNN’s coverage. Dion and Gennady recall Jack’s face going white at the news.
“Christ, Rick Ames! He worked for me as a case officer!” Jack exclaimed. “He was Hav Smith’s guy, turned into a typical CIA drunk…” He paused. “I should talk. But at least I got clean. And I was never a first-class asshole, like Rick. I don’t think he had a friend in the division. Now that I think about it, I’m not really surprised.”
When the newsman mentioned Ames dropping off an envelope at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, that’s when it hit Gennady: just a few feet away in Jack’s guest bedroom was something he had brought for his friends to see. From his suitcase, he retrieved his own secret manila envelope and tossed it onto the table in front of the other Musketeers.
“I worried about bringing this the last time,” Gennady said. “But they didn’t search my bag then, so I brought it now. Maybe this Ames guy fucked up my life?” As Dion recalls it, “Gennady had brought nine legal pages of notes he kept from his interrogation, written in English. As he was reading them, they rang a bell for Jack and I.” There were references to Pelton, Motorin, Martynov, his pharmacist friend, and even little Sherry, the bank teller in Guyana. “It sounded just like the memo we wrote from Guyana. So I went to Buzzard Point and retrieved our original. I came back to Jack’s house and we laid the original memo side by side with Gennady’s notes. They were like Xerox copies. That nailed it. A light bulb went off. Jack and I looked at each other, and we were thinking the same thing.” Now Gennady could at last see physical proof that there was nothing incriminating in Jack’s original memo, but every detail matched his interrogation. Gennady could also see that it wasn’t just he who had been compromised but all three Musketeers. “If he had any lingering doubts, by now he knew for certain it wasn’t us,” recalls Dion.
“What did you write about us in your memo to the Center?” Jack asked. 
“I never wrote one. I was forbidden from seeing you,” Gennady answered. 
"Well, fuck, if they had our memo and none from you, you can see why they were suspicious, like you were hiding something,” Jack said.
“Jack then did some digging at CIA and determined that there was no way Ames could have had access to our Guyana memo,” Dion recalls. “He was in Rome at the time. Plus we knew there were no tradecraft errors in Guyana. If anybody knew how to spot surveillance it was Cowboy. And thanks to Jack’s IOC, I never made those kinds of mistakes. Now we all knew there was another mole besides Ames.”
“We’re still bleeding somewhere,” Jack said. 
Jack and Dion discussed the memo with other members of the joint CIA and FBI mole-hunting team, which included former Musketeer driver Mike Rochford, who had just met Gennady for the first time. Roch was struck by the Russian’s charisma and fun-loving manner: “I immediately saw what Cowboy and Dion saw in him.”

The US intelligence community had breathed a collective, albeit premature, sigh of relief after the Ames roll-up, thinking the leak had been plugged. But to their dismay, they soon learned—courtesy of the Musketeers and other ongoing calculations—there was someone else at large in the warrens of the American spy apparatus, a traitor who had orchestrated what the Department of Justice would later call “the worst intelligence disaster in US history.” As hard as it would be to comprehend, the at-large traitor was far worse than Ames.
The CIA and the FBI both came to agree with the obvious awful conclusion that Ames couldn’t have been responsible for all the damage because things like Jack and Dion’s memo, which had gotten back to the Russians, hadn’t been under Ames’s purview. Ames’s treachery had led to the deaths of many US assets. This other bastard was also responsible for betraying intelligence valued in the billions of dollars. He, or she, was also the one who put Gennady in Lefortovo.
The mole hunt understandably escalated after the realizations of 1994. 
Even Congress got involved, as the chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Dennis DeConcini, not only held hearings on the subject that year but personally interviewed Ames in his prison cell. The evidence was as clear to DeConcini as it had been to Jack and Dion. “There has to be another,” DeConcini remarked, echoing the Musketeers’ conclusions.
Mole-hunting units were expanded from Langley to FBI HQ to the Buzzard Point and New York City field offices.* Multiple lists were drawn up, again, with one list including three hundred CIA officers who had had questionable polygraph results and another containing the names of two hundred KGB agents who were in a position to know something. When a listed KGB man was tracked down, Rochford jumped on a plane to a far-flung region of the planet to offer him the million-dollar bounty. He counted twenty-eight pitches he made personally to try to solve the riddle.
Bob Wade and Rochford also made a dozen trips to London to trawl through KGB files smuggled out of Moscow in 1992 by former KGB archivist Vasili Mitrokhin. When Yasenevo was constructed in the early 1970s, Mitrokhin had been in charge of transferring the KGB’s records from the old Lubyanka facility. But secretly he made meticulous copies of many of the secret documents, and hid them in the floorboards of his dacha. By 1992, he had amassed twenty-five thousand pages, which he brought to Britain’s MI6 when he defected to London that year. By the time Rochford and Wade showed up, the files had unmasked seven KGB spies and moles. It made sense to assume the new US source might be disclosed in Mitrokhin’s cache. But he wasn’t.

In 1994, Gennady’s spying skills were pushed to their limits—but on the home front. Schooled in stealth by the best, he had always been good at hiding the details of his dalliances from Irina, who of course knew what was happening but tolerated it as a Russian way of life. Her one demand was that Gennady’s infidelities remain discrete from their family’s world. The challenge now was his attraction to Masha, a beautiful Muscovite twenty-five years his junior. When asked how the affair started, Gennady gives his typical response to thorny questions: “Shit happens, especially when I’m around women.” Normally, Gennady had no problem navigating the treacherous shoals of adultery, but this was a special circumstance: Masha had been his daughter Julia’s childhood playmate and remained one of her best friends.
Incredibly, Gennady was able to walk this tightrope for over a decade, even as Masha bore him more children and lived at an apartment Gennady kept for her in town. The insouciant Gennady would say today that he loves both his families and didn’t want to hurt anyone. “It’s just what it is,” he says calmly. Consequently, he had no intention of getting divorced and was perfectly happy with how things were going with the family that bore the Vasilenko name as well as his secret second family. What added to the logistical strain for Gennady was the finances of it all: he had to support two families without Irina noticing the missing income.
In 1994, Gennady closed down Bullit when an old KGB friend offered him a VP position in a larger enterprise. The new multinational company, Securitar, run by ex-KGB officer Viktor Popov, was but one facet of Popov’s new private-sector security empire. He also ran Oskord Security Group with eighty ex-KGB staff and a thousand total employees. “Here we carry out the same tasks we did for the state,” Popov said in an interview. Securitar’s brochure advertised personal bodyguards, business security guards, installation of security equipment, and consulting services. “We took the best of what existed at the KGB and set it up here.”
Thanks to Jack’s Williams College pal Dave Cook, who was now chief of security for the International Monetary Fund, Securitar quickly landed a major contract, providing security for the IMF’s Moscow office. Gennady got to meet former president George H. W. Bush when he provided security for the opening of the Moscow office of Goldman Sachs in 1994. On that occasion, Gennady chided Bush, telling him, “I was spying against the CIA when you were running it in the seventies.” Despite the jab, Bush posed for a picture with his former adversary.

Securitar also signed a contract with a US medical supply company that was losing millions of dollars in drugs that simply disappeared after being shipped to Moscow, only to resurface back in the US on the cheaper “gray market” to compete with the original manufacturer. Gennady and Jack continued with their own business partnership, too, now renamed FKCFO (Former KGB, CIA, and FBI Officers).
Ironically, the joint venture spree engendered by the US-Russian reset almost derailed that very reset and fired up the ’80s spy wars that had just recently calmed down. At the center of the storm was a dear friend of Gennady’s, ex-KGB agent Vladimir Galkin, and the man in the shadows who helped extinguish the flare-up was another close friend, Cowboy Jack. The origins of the misstep were the hackneyed misunderstandings between those bureaucratic rivals, the FBI and the CIA. And who better to mediate what amounted to a dustup than a man respected by both?
Gennady’s friendship with Galkin began when they attended the Andropov Institute together for three years in the early ’70s. Galkin went on to become a senior officer in the First Directorate’s Line X, where he was tasked with stealing scientific and technical secrets from the West. During his seventeen-year career, he had many successes, including the penetration of France’s nuclear program. By 1996, fifty-year-old Vlad, who had retired from the KGB after the USSR’s dissolution in 1991, had started his own Russia-US joint venture called Knowledge Express, and he had come to the US to buy surveillance equipment at a New Jersey trade show. Instead, the FBI arrested him on arrival at JFK Airport on October 29, 1996.
Galkin honestly identified himself to the FBI as a former intelligence officer, as so stated on his visa application, calling attention to an unwritten agreement between the CIA and Russian intelligence not to go after retired case officers. In custody, the FBI presented him with an ultimatum: cooperate on other outstanding espionage cases or face up to thirty years in prison. If he cooperated, however, he could be released to live in the United States, with a fat payday to boot.
Instead, Galkin demanded a phone, called his wife, Svetlana, in Moscow, and told her to inform Russian intelligence of what had happened. One of the next calls she received was from Gennady. “I heard the news on television in Moscow and immediately called Svetlana. Then I called Jack and asked him to alert his friends and the whole CIA retired community to do something to free Galkin; otherwise, there would be retaliation against CIA guys like Jack doing business here in Russia. Jack did it. He made a lot of noise in the US, calling all his CIA friends at AFIO [Association of Former Intelligence Officers]. We made a lot of noise in Russia as well.”
The “noise” was heard, and the CIA ruminated over damage control while the arrest made headlines around the world. Galkin was hauled off to courts and jails in Brooklyn and Boston, and finally to the federal district court in Worcester, forty miles west of Boston. The Soviet Embassy hired New York defense attorney Jerry Bernstein (a former member of the Organized Crime Strike Force, which famously flipped goodfella Henry Hill) to represent Galkin, whom Bernstein recently recalled as being “a lovely man, charming—just a nice guy.” The attorney remembers the judge glaring at the US attorneys, intoning, “You’d better not be starting World War III!” When Bernstein arranged what he thought was a nice bail package, allowing Galkin to stay in the Soviet Embassy, the KGB would hear nothing of it. “They wanted him completely exonerated and released or else they wanted him in jail where they could create an international incident over it,” Bernstein remembers.
Behind the scenes, CIA Director John Deutch bickered with the FBI over who was at fault, with the Bureau claiming that it had notified the CIA of its plans to arrest the Russian, while Deutch stated that no such notification had ever occurred.
The tension reached a boil when, on November 15, Russia’s prime minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, called Vice President Al Gore to personally complain. With Gore’s assent, Deutch convinced the DOJ to just drop the case. In court, as Bernstein remembers, “a motion to dismiss on the grounds of national security was introduced.” Galkin was released after seventeen days in custody, and he immediately flew home to Svetlana. Before departing, the FBI apologized and gave him an FBI coffee mug. He and Gennady have maintained regular contact to this day, and Gennady has no doubt that Jack’s intercession played a key role in getting the ball rolling on bringing the case to its climax.
With guarantees of safety for KGB capitalists now de facto codified, Gennady felt comfortable bringing his other ex-KGB colleagues, including his boss Popov, with him to the US to meet Jack and Dion and pursue mutual business opportunities in the security field. Before the first arrival in the US of Gennady’s spook friends, Jack had told Gennady that he would be passing their names pro forma over to Roch and Dion, who would want to interview them. Jack embodied not only the loyal patriotic Marine but also the CIA man who never really retires, setting up the stereotypical consulting firm that keeps a cozy relationship with Langley—exactly how ex-KGB officers’ consulting companies worked with Yasenevo. Jack told Gennady that Rochford was particularly interested in talking to Victor Cherkashin, now himself in the private security game, and asked if Gennady would invite him over for a future conference on the topic.
Jack assured Gennady that little would come of the referrals, since Gennady’s friends likely knew nothing of interest and, especially Cherkashin, were all financially comfortable, with no need to sell out their country (Cherkashin by this time headed a private security company called Alpha-Puma, with dozens of big contracts with major corporations and with more than a hundred employees). It was just a way of keeping everybody happy. With no special enthusiasm, Gennady agreed to pass on the invitation. Jack had told his friend the truth; however, he lied to the visiting Russians when he assured them they wouldn’t be pitched.
Alan Kohler was a young FBI man newly assigned to the Washington Field Office’s counterintelligence squad and obviously knowledgeable of the ongoing attempts to ferret out the second traitor. Soon after he landed at the WFO, he also became aware of Cowboy Jack and his revered reputation before even meeting him. “I knew of Jack as a legend,” Kohler says. “All of the veterans talked about him.” Kohler is very clear about what the retired CIA man could bring to the mole hunt years after his retirement: “Part of Jack’s relevance was his ability to reach out to Russians.”
As he had in the past, Jack turned to his family for assistance. Michelle, at that point thirty years old and with the nickname “Moxie,” remembers, “My job was to babysit the KGB guys when they were between meetings in Washington. I’d take them shopping, to museums, whatever.” But just like with the IOC training, Michelle/Moxie was also functioning as an operative for her dad. “I would be told which ones to distract so the FBI could target other ones. It was the same at parties. Dad would give me a look, and I knew to start engaging someone so Dad could have a private conversation with an asset or target.”
In February 1997, the HTG-Securitar joint venture indeed brought retired KGB men Victor Cherkashin, Alexander Pavlovskij, and Viktor Popov to Georgetown University in order to attend a conference on nuclear waste disposal security. During that event, Jack and Gennady submitted a bid for the disposal on a Pacific atoll of spent nuclear fuel from many countries (the state of Colorado ultimately won the bid). When Cherkashin met Rochford and Dion’s new WFO counterintelligence chief Ray Mislock at the conference, he was certain what was coming next, even though Jack again reassured him that no pitches were forthcoming.
During a break in the conference, the group had what would prove to be a fortuitous brunch in Alexandria with some of Jack’s connected friends, investigative author Dan Moldea, espionage expert and documentary producer Jeff Goldberg, and former top Senate investigator, now private security consultant Phil Manuel.
Manuel, whose early origins were in military counterintelligence, had recently partnered with the HTG-Securitar venture and would travel to Russia twice with Jack. Since Jack and his HTG partner Ben Wickham were business novices—Ben the investigator, Jack the trainer—Manuel became the company’s unofficial business advisor, helping to handle clients, primarily US firms that wanted to do business in Russia but were concerned about who they might end up dealing with as well as how to navigate the expanding oligarch corruption. An astute observer of human nature, Manuel liked watching Jack interact with people like Cherkashin, and he learned why the Agency put such faith in his training skills. “He was interrogating you, but you never knew he was interrogating you. He was looking for the slightest insight, a ‘tell.’”
In Manuel’s mind, Jack’s “Cowboy” persona was disarming, and even Jack’s coarse language could throw people off the scent—Manuel suspected Jack was always looking for traitors. “He would only tell you what he wanted you to know.” Manuel’s bond with Jack was intellectual; he knew the “serious Jack Platt.” Jack enjoyed the Cowboy facade, but that guarded the man who knew Russian history and was a fervent anti-Communist—the last true anti-Communist warrior who had fought in the shadows but who didn’t hate Russians, just their system, which he thought was dangerous. Manuel and Jack spent hours talking about how Soviet intelligence operated, with Jack turning Manuel on to the Russian political newspaper Iskra (The Spark), how Lenin felt revolutions got started, and the role of propaganda. “Jack was steeped in this stuff and felt it explained what the Russians were up to.”
Moldea, who had recently been appointed to HTG’s board of directors, had met Jack in 1994, introduced, like Manuel, by a mutual friend: DC Metro Police detective Carl Shoffler, famous for having arrested the Watergate burglars in June 1972. Other attendees at the quarterly Shoffler Brunch included ex-CIA officer Ben Wickham, ex-FBI agent Harry Gossett, and ex–New York mob guy turned FBI consultant Ron Fino. The group was a heady mix of Washington investigative insiders, and in years to come, these new associations would prove a valuable support system for Jack and Gennady. For a time, Jeff Goldberg, who became very close to Jack, considered writing a book about Jack’s life, but for many of the reasons some books don’t get written, it never made it out of the starting gate.*
Of course, in all matters concerning Jack and Gennady, comic relief and one-upsmanship were never off the radar. Harry Gossett recalls that he once accompanied the Musketeers to lunch at Evans Farm Inn, a favorite CIA watering hole in McLean. Jack’s choice of venue, however, had nothing to do with the menu, as Gennady would soon discover. At one point in the conversation, Gennady bragged sotto voce that this had been one of his favorite drop sites when he was stationed in DC. “I knew that you guys would never suspect a dead drop so close to your own headquarters,” Gennady proudly chided.
“You mean under a rock like that?” Jack said as he pointed to a roadside rock about the size of a basketball. Gennady nodded. With that, Jack motioned Gennady and Harry over to the rock. “I wonder if anyone still does that,” Jack said. “Let’s see.” Harry noticed the smile on Gennady’s face dimming as Jack asked him to roll the rock away. After he had done so, a folded piece of paper was revealed on the ground.
“I’ll be damned,” exclaimed Jack. “I wonder what it says.” 
Gennady picked it up and read it to himself. 
“You son of a bitch!” Gennady said to Jack. 
According to Harry, the note read: We knew about this drop site all along. Love, Cowboy.
In the absence of his IOC course, Jack’s love of instructing young people found alternative forms of expression. Pat, the wife of his old Marine buddy Matty Caulfield, worked in the House of Representative’s Page School in the 1990s and invited Jack to speak to the students. When Caulfield asked her how the session went, she said, “Great, and the students really liked his friend.”
“What friend?” 
“His friend in the KGB. He is the most handsome guy.” Matty couldn’t believe that Jack had snuck a former KGB agent into the House of Representatives.

In 1998, a one year after the Georgetown conference the Russians returned to the US, where Jack put up his former adversaries Gennady and Cherkashin at his Great Falls house. Harry Gossett has vivid memories of a large group of Russian KGB retirees drunk on vodka on Jack’s front lawn. The ostensible reason for this trip was a police symposium on organized crime, to be held at the Espionage Research Institute in Virginia Beach, but Cherkashin had made the trip in part to visit his daughter, who was studying in California. Jack’s FBI friend Courtney West, who used to be a car salesman, remembers that Cherkashin approached him about possibly starting an auto import-export business. “He said that the nouveau riche Russian capitalists loved to drive around in big old Buicks and Pontiacs,” recalls West. “But just not as old as those in Cuba.”
The group drove to Virginia Beach, where the Russians made presentations on tactics used to combat the Russian Mafia and agreed to furnish the Americans with whatever intel they needed. Cowboy Jack made a presentation on the American Mafia. While at Virginia Beach, Cherkashin felt a searing pain in his right side, and Cowboy drove him to a local hospital. After an injection, Cherkashin had an unpleasant taste in his mouth and suspected that the syringe contained a truth serum, in advance of a pitch from US intelligence. He was wrong about the serum but right about the pitch.
As he recovered on the beach, Cherkashin was approached by a dark-haired man, who walked right up to his canopied beach chair. As recounted in Cherkashin’s autobiography, Spy Handler, the exchange went something like this:
“Victor Cherkashin?” 
“Yes.” 
“My name is Michael Rochford.” 
After a little chitchat about the conference, Roch got to the point, admitting he was FBI.
“I work casing the Russian Embassy, and I know a lot of people posted there over the years. I want to talk to you about your time in the United States.”
“I don’t think I can be of much help to you,” Cherkashin responded, adding that he’d been retired for seven years, and lying that all he knew about Aldrich Ames was what he’d read in the papers. Roch told the KGB man that he was looking for a different source, someone who knew about the executions of Motorin and others. Then possibly bluffing, or thinking of a CIA analyst wrongly under suspicion at the time, Roch said that an arrest was imminent; the Bureau just wanted corroboration. He added that he knew Cherkashin had met with the source, which was another bluff—and untrue. In fact, no one in the KGB knew the source’s real identity, only that he went by the name of “Ramon Garcia.”* In fact, just like the Americans, the Russians didn’t know which agency “Garcia” worked for.
“The FBI is ready to pay you one million dollars,” said Rochford. 
Cherkashin wrote that he didn’t have to think for a second about his response: “A million dollars is worth little compared to my honor.” He added that he had enough money anyway. Cherkashin excused himself, only to be approached a few more times by Rochford during the conference. The Russian became so rattled that he left early for Moscow, without even seeing his daughter. But the Bureau was still not finished pitching the KGB’s former DC counterintelligence chief, and Rochford was dogged in his hopes of turning him.

Jack and Gennady’s next adventure was completely unforeseeable. When American TV networks were gearing up to produce special broadcasts to celebrate the CIA’s fiftieth anniversary, the greatest American actor of his generation simultaneously thought to commemorate the occasion with a feature film. CBS, the Discovery Channel, and Robert De Niro all needed experts, especially colorful, telegenic ones. The two cowboys were ready for prime time.
