After completing his operational training at the secret “Farm” facility, located near Williamsburg, Virginia, Jack spent two years at the CIA’s new Langley headquarters, a period that proved instrumental to his great successes down the road. 
This was due in large part to his being assigned to work with the man who taught him the real tricks of the trade, counterintelligence whiz Haviland Smith, who was referred to as “an illusionist” because he consulted magicians in order to learn about deception and misdirection. 
Smith soon gained Jack’s friendship and, more importantly, his respect. 
In addition to being an expert in field surveillance detection and deception, Smith had the confidence of the suits in the Agency’s seventh-floor executive suites. 
“He knew where all the bodies were buried,” Jack recalled.
A Russian studies graduate of the University of London and former Chief of Station (COS) in Prague, Hav Smith achieved legendary status among US spies for his innovative methods of combating the enemies’ aggressive surveillance, especially behind the Iron Curtain. 
In Prague, where Smith’s field officers were subject to crushing, lockstep scrutiny, the COS was forced to become inventive in order to carry out the mission. 
Thus were born techniques such as “moving through the gap,” the “brush pass,” and the “moving car delivery.”
A field officer learned to create a momentary gap in surveillance by lulling the enemy into complacency with a repeated pattern of mundane errands done day after day at precise times (going for a coffee, getting a haircut, returning the babysitter, etc.). 
When the opponent relaxed for a few seconds, certain that the CIA officer was just getting his daily newspaper, a gap in surveillance might be created. 
And only a few seconds were needed in order to progress to the next Smith contrivance, the brush pass, wherein the officer walks past his asset and, without acknowledging him in any way, makes the handoff. 
A gap could likewise be created between two cars as the first car turned a corner, with brake lights disabled, allowing the driver to make an exchange or a dead drop through a window before the trailing car made the same turn and spotted it.
These and other breakthroughs were embraced by Cowboy Jack, and he added to them his Marine-inspired toughness, eventually passing the lessons on to the next generation of CIA officers, the rookies who would be inserted behind the Iron Curtain.
It wasn’t easy, though. 
Both Hav’s and Jack’s unorthodox new techniques were constantly met with disapproval from the suits above, who were risk averse in the extreme. 
Between the Agency bureaucracy and Cowboy, a man who had no interest in careerism and only sought to complete a mission, a tension grew, which only increased over the course of his career. 
Caulfield says, “The big problem Jack had was with phonies.” 
It didn’t help that Jack broke the Agency’s dress code on a daily basis with his uniform of a Stetson hat, Lucchese “shit-kicker” boots, tattered blue jeans, and L.L.Bean hunting vest. 
The nickname “Cowboy,” Paige explains, described more than her husband’s attire and “wasn’t meant as a compliment” coming from his CIA compatriots. 
The feeling was mutual: “Neckties cut off blood flow to the brain,” Cowboy was fond of saying. 
“That explains the mentality on the seventh floor.” 
Even without Cowboy Jack’s sartorial choices, his purposeful gait through Langley’s hallways made him stand out. 
“Jack moved at warp speed,” one colleague recalls. 
“I think it was an upshot of his years evading surveillance in the field. I always used to ask him, ‘Where the fuck are you racing to?’ He’d just smile as he disappeared down the hall.”
Jack’s locker-room language, peppered with his favorite four-letter word, the “f-bomb,” only added to the friction
CIA officer Burton Gerber, who would later become Jack’s boss in the SE (Soviet/East Europe) Division, recalls how he and Jack had to have heart-to-hearts about Jack’s foul language: “I tried to encourage him to tone it down, but Jack never seemed to take the input. He wasn’t confrontational; he just was unaware of how he spoke.” 
Fellow SE officer Jack Lee explains that “Jack alone was given a lot of slack because he was so good.”
As to just what set Jack apart skill-wise, his oldest daughter, Leigh, describes it this way: “His whole demeanor is that of a person relaxed and without a care in the world. 
This face of tranquility and mellowness is deceptive. He doesn’t miss a thing.” 
Fellow officer Brant Bassett says succinctly, “Cowboy embodied the best of what we were—total dedication to the mission, a hard worker who only cared about helping his country. He was the opposite of the careerists he had to answer to. And a genuine iconoclast.” Jack’s confidant John “Mad Dog” Denton of the FBI says, “When things got crazy, Jack got calm.”
Claiming that one is motivated by patriotism and not career advancement is a familiar refrain, but Jack made his aversion to bureaucratic upward mobility into high art. 
“You’re either a headquarters asshole or a street guy like me,” Jack told newsman Dan Rather years later. 
For Jack, it was all about being posted to wherever the threat to the American “fragile experiment” seemed most acute.
As Leigh wrote, “For my father, [headquarters] was akin to an assignment in ‘hell.’ CIA headquarters was a stuffy, bureaucratic place filled with power struggles, political turmoil, and overall poor judgment.” Jack often described CIA chiefs as having an old OSS “parachute mentality,” meaning that if someone could parachute into Europe during the war, they were considered qualified to work at the CIA. 
“For the next year, he worked at Langley and kept his eyes and ears tuned for other assignments.”
In 1965, relief from the cubicle tedium came in the form of a coveted posting in Vienna, Austria. 
The Platt family now numbered five, with twin daughters Michelle and Diana born the previous year. 
“Paige knew what I did,” Jack readily admitted. 
“It’s up to each overseas case officer whether to tell his wife. In fact, Paige became my reports officer.” 
Reports officers edited CIA operatives’ memoranda and sent them back to headquarters for review. 
“She also helped when it came to entertaining. 
At a party, I’d say, ‘That’s the target. 
Put on your best bra.’ She gave me a .357 Smith & Wesson Magnum for my thirtieth birthday. 
I also have a Marlin 336 and a .30-30 Winchester, model 1854. 
But Gennady was much more proficient with guns than me.”
Paige describes attending an endless procession of “smile parties” in Austria where everyone drank and the wives just smiled until their faces hurt. 
Wives often served as their husbands’ eyes and ears. 
“Everybody drank too much,” Paige says, admitting she was not a good drinker and was mindful of her mother’s all-consuming alcoholism.
On returning to the US a few years later, the Platts bought a two-story red brick house on Myer Terrace in Rockville, Maryland, but it was to be mostly rented out, as Jack would continue to solicit and accept overseas postings—anything to get away from headquarters. 
He hoped he wouldn’t be posted to the hot spot, Vietnam, where he wouldn’t be allowed to take his family. 
That wouldn’t work for Jack—he knew how many Agency families had been fractured by the absence of fathers.
Through the intercession of friends in the CIA hierarchy, Jack was assigned to the Laos operations desk, where he worked to save the lives and families of Laotian assets/friends and see them resettled in the USA—this in preparation for Jack’s being posted in the Asian country. 
He enrolled in the Agency’s language school, where he studied French for the better part of a year in advance of joining the Soviet operations team at the station in Vientiane, Laos, family in tow. 
The country had been a French protectorate for the first half of the twentieth century, and although rural areas still spoke Lao, a good number of the citizens in the capital of Vientiane spoke French.
In Laos, from 1972 to 1974, Jack coordinated closely with a cabal of “Black Thai” Laotian spies known as the Kangaroos, whose job it was to keep the CIA apprised of the visits of foreigners, especially Russians. 
Jack also frequented a popular local bar called The Purple Porpoise, which was owned by a lovable magician named Montague “Monty” Banks. 
The bar was an Asian version of Rick’s Café Américain from the movie Casablanca, rife with spies and conmen from a dozen countries. 
While Monty regaled Jack’s kids with card tricks, their dad was off in a corner plying a Kangaroo asset. 
The kids were engulfed in the spook world, and when popular movie prints arrived at the US commissary, Jack brought home his favorites. 
Leigh especially remembers watching the James Bond thriller Live and Let Die when Jack brought it home for her birthday. 
“I believe we watched it at least twenty times in three days,” Leigh recalls. 
Similar movies were brought into the home at least once a month during their time in Vientiane.*
Entertainment got even more real for Leigh, whom Jack used as cover while he took photos of Chinese Communist operatives enveloping the country. 
He routinely claimed that he was just an American dad on vacation with his young daughter. 
The ruse worked until Laos was falling to the Communists and a Chinese military officer confiscated his camera.
When the Platts’ tour was up, Jack became so concerned that all the accumulated furnishings would fall into enemy hands on the day they left that he staged a robbery of his own house. 
He alerted his many Laotian friends that the night before his departure he would be out for a few hours with the family, so they were welcome to help themselves to everything except their luggage. 
He asked only that they share the spoils with their poorest neighbors. 
Dozens of Laotians saw the family off the next day.
By far the most important takeaway from the Laos years was the added tradecraft tutelage by his coworkers Brian O’Connor and George Kenning Jr. 
These men, like Hav Smith, had developed successful field detection and evasion techniques that became part of Jack’s own arsenal.
Laos was also a critical juncture in the Platts’ marriage, because it was in that political and climatological cauldron that Paige realized Jack had a serious drinking problem. 
“Alcoholism is insidious, slow in coming,” Paige says, haunted as she recalls military pilots drinking and then flying at Camp Lejeune. 
“Alcohol flowed like water wherever we were stationed.” 
The “goodbye parties” for intelligence personnel in Laos would literally last three or four days, Paige remembers, and it got more intense as Laos and Vietnam collapsed politically. 
Given her mother’s fate, she held out little hope that any alcoholic had the capacity to abandon the bottle. 
She knew she was headed for a showdown with Jack, but there were serious challenges to consider: Children. Finances. Getting a lawyer. 
These were the days before communication between spouses vaulted into the zeitgeist as a cure-all. 
Besides, Jack was a spy. Communicate? No, spies kept their mouths shut.
Before Jack’s two-year Laotian stint wound down, he had complained to his family about a likely, dreaded recall to hell—i.e., Langley—but out of the blue, he learned of a vacant Agency position in Paris. 
He grabbed it before anyone else had a chance. 
By coincidence, his friends and colleagues from Laos, O’Connor and Kenning, also transferred to the City of Light. 
So the stage was set for a good experience all around.
The entire Platt family was excited about the Paris relocation—finally a Western country with good schools for the girls. 
Their Rockville home again would be occupied more regularly by strangers than by the actual mortgage holders. 
One drawback to the new posting was that the Platts, accustomed to 100-degree Laotian living, were virtually “freezing” all day long for the first few months in France. 
The advantage for Jack was to be working with some of the finer senior case officers in the CIA.
A Paris assignment that was especially close to Jack’s heart was the continued liaison with Kenning and O’Connor in efforts to save their Laotian assets, many of whom had become like family. 
Working with fellow Paris Station officer Larry Riddick, Jack accelerated the paperwork that allowed hundreds of Laotians to resettle in the US, and he maintained contact with many of them for the rest of his life.
Jack quickly gained a reputation as the Paris Station prankster; often at formal embassy receptions he executed hyperbolic pratfalls (“Plattfalls”) just to see the honor guards’ reactions. 
His serious Paris Station responsibilities included assisting in the training and preparation of a Russian scientist (working for the US) to return to Moscow. 
He also dealt with forty-two leaked CIA names, published by the French newspaper Libération in 1976 as CIA officers working under cover of the US Embassy in Paris. 
Jack was one of them. 
Disgruntled CIA officer Philip Agee had orchestrated the treason, and Jack wanted badly to get his hands on him.
Within days of the Libération disclosure, French classmates asked Leigh if her dad was CIA. 
She had always thought he was employed by the “economics section” of the State Department, assigned to various embassies. 
She assumed he kept getting transferred because of his coarse language or, worse, that he was some kind of criminal. 
Did they move around so much because he was afraid of getting nicked on an unsavory scheme? Leigh thought this way because she had been in the midst of devouring the Hardy Boys and Nancy Drew mystery books. 
Her curiosity had also been piqued when her parents forbade her to go on a school trip to the Soviet Union though they had let her go on an earlier trip to Spain.
After overhearing her parents discuss their tapped phones during the Libération scandal, Leigh demanded the truth. 
Jack admitted he was with the CIA, actually saying, “I’m a spy.” 
He conceded that he hadn’t let her go on the trip to the Soviet Union for fear that the KGB might learn of her identity, kidnap her, and hold her as a pawn. 
The high schooler was both thrilled (“Totally cool!”) and relieved, telling her dad, regarding their constant relocations, “I thought it was because you couldn’t keep a job.”
Weeks after their initial showdown, Leigh approached her father again and asked him a question that had been plaguing her: “Have you ever killed anybody?”
After a beat, Jack answered, “I never pulled the trigger.” 
Michelle Platt remembers finding out about her father’s career a little differently. One day, while Aunt Polly (“Hollywood Polly”) was visiting them in Paris, Polly let loose about Jack’s being a spy. 
Michelle was stunned. 
She had been under the impression that her father was a Foreign Service officer, which made sense because the family was always moving around the world. 
“It’s impossible to keep secrets in a family forever,” Michelle says. 
Jack was not pleased about sister Polly’s loose lips and told her so. 
“Not everybody wants their name in lights!”
Diana knew something was different about her father and his friends when she was instructed on how to interact with her “uncles” should she run into them publicly. 
Jack told her, “If you see Uncle Larry in public, you walk up to him like you don’t know him and ask him what time it is. 
If he gives you a big hug, acknowledge him and hug him back. 
If he just tells you the time like he doesn’t know you, scram.”
Paige briefly worked for the CIA, but Agency work was not a great gig for women in the Cold War era. 
Nevertheless, she helped Jack in some of his exercises. 
“My mom always worked,” Michelle says. 
Paige had taught English as a second language in Laos and worked for a temp agency, Forbes magazine, and a computer company. 
Even when he encountered Paige’s colleagues, Jack kept his cover by using the name Mr. 
Gordon, taking Paige’s maiden name. 
Paige had the business sense in the marriage, recalls Michelle, acknowledging, “My father was not a great businessman.”
Despite many warm family memories of globetrotting and ski trips in Austria, the Platts weren’t exactly the Brady Bunch. 
“We were latchkey kids,” Michelle says. 
Marital tension brewed beneath the surface, as Paige was tiring of Jack’s alcoholism and was perpetually contemplating leaving him, which partly explained her self-reliance.
In the Platt family dynamic, Paige was the disciplinarian, Jack the troublemaker—despite Paige’s futile efforts to exploit her husband’s fabled Marine fearsomeness. 
Leigh recalls her mother being annoyed with her when she was young and admonishing, “Wait until your father gets home.” 
When Jack got home, he would sternly agree that he would deal with the delinquent Leigh. 
He would then proceed to take her into the bathroom and tickle her until tears gushed from her eyes. 
Once he was satisfied that her tears were sufficient, he would tell Leigh to go and tell her mother that she was crying because of how strict he had been with her. 
Eventually, Jack’s un-scariness on the domestic front became common knowledge to the Platt girls’ friends. 
“Everybody wanted our dad to be their dad,” says Diana. 
One of Jack’s future business partners said, “Paige’s eyes must ache from all the rolling.”
Jack’s battle with the bottle may have created personal turmoil, but none of his colleagues would say it affected his work. 
In fact, by this point, he had received a number of Agency performance citations for his success in the field. 
When asked to explain the accolades, he said, “When I was overseas I had a successful recruiting in every posting.”
A critical assignment for him came in 1975 when he toured CIA stations around the world with one of the USSR’s most damaging defectors, ex-KGB officer Yuri Nosenko. 
It was Nosenko who had informed the Warren Commission that, among other things, while the Soviets were aware of presidential assassin Lee Harvey Oswald, they thought he was a kook and would never have mobilized him to take violent action against a US president. 
Jack’s mission was to facilitate Nosenko’s secret briefings of CIA officers of critical intelligence, including how the KGB had infiltrated US embassies and bugged the embassy in Moscow. 
Jack was proud to have such an important asset in his care. 
He also took note of how Nosenko’s instinctive fondness for American life animated his cooperation with the CIA—this despite having been kept in solitary confinement for three years by Jack’s suspicious predecessors in the SE Division. 
It was a lesson that would apply to another KGB officer with American tastes who would soon enter his life.
In 1978, the Platts left Paris and settled again in the US, and Cowboy Jack returned to the Agency’s dreaded Langley headquarters, where he joined three hundred other SE officers. 
The SE was known to be the most elite, secretive, and cliquish division at the CIA, but Cowboy had little need for in-crowd mentality; he was all about the mission. 
By far the most fulfilling of Cowboy’s new tasks was continuing to assist in the resettlement of refugees from the war-torn regions of Laos, Vietnam, and Cambodia. 
However, most of Jack’s time was spent in the counterintelligence world, and that was another story altogether.
At this time, the Agency was helmed by Jimmy Carter appointee Admiral Stansfield Turner, and like Jack’s numerous other executive nemeses, Turner was set in his ways, reflexively refusing to explore creative methods for conducting espionage. 
Thus, always looking to get away from the CIA’s bean counters and careerists, Jack succeeded, after six months at SE, in having himself assigned to one of the newly established domestic stations: the DC branch, where he managed “Soviet recruitment operations.” The secret facility, located in Bethesda, Maryland, was housed in the recently built (1972) thirteen-story Air Rights Center at 7315 Wisconsin Avenue—just thirteen miles (but a universe) away from the suits on Langley’s seventh floor. 
The station operated in four small rented offices under the commercial cover of a consulting firm. 
In the lower right-hand corner of Jack’s desk was a fully stocked cooler for beers, but the best part for Jack was being reunited with his friend and mentor Hav Smith, who was the new outpost’s Chief of Station. 
(Jack’s ultimate boss was SE Division chief Dick Stolz, former COS in Moscow and one of the Agency’s most respected officers.)
Although it is widely perceived that the CIA has a strictly foreign mandate, this is not the case. 
Its Domestic Operations Division (later the National Resources Division) was formed in the early 1960s, with the sole mission of targeting and recruiting foreign nationals of interest living in the US. 
However, once a target was identified, the Agency had to coordinate with the FBI, which, per regulation, would take the lead on the joint operation. 
Of course, as has been extensively documented, this interagency arrangement, rife with career rivalries, did not always operate as smoothly as would be hoped.
The aim of the CIA’s new DC Station was to target—and turn—KGB officers working out of the Soviet Embassy. 
“I was doing what we called ‘residency analysis’ of the Soviet compound,” Jack recalled. 
“By our count, they employed over one hundred spies in Washington, either KGB or GRU [military intelligence].” 
The effort, which was coordinated with the FBI’s W. 
Lane Crocker, had failed for forty years to turn a local KGB man, although the Russian-speaking Crocker had a legendary reputation for unmasking KGB agents in the US. 
The fifteen FBI assignees to Crocker’s so-called KGB Squad, or CI-4,* held to their mantra: “Identify, penetrate, neutralize.” 
Like the SE Division at the CIA, it was often described as the best squad in the Bureau.
Now, with the specter of nuclear annihilation ever on their shoulders, it was hoped that in combination with the skills of the CIA’s best, the FBI could end that losing streak. 
For Jack, the joint operation also meant new friendships with G-men, as well as a burgeoning respect for their bureaucracy, which seemed to move with more energy and efficiency than his own CIA’s.
Jack had long ago concluded that a doomed strategy for turning an asset was the “cold pitch”—cornering a target by surprise and proposing a spy arrangement. 
To illustrate his point, Jack told the story of a CIA deputy of his named Nick, who was tailed by the KGB to a menacing monastery in Kiev called Pechersk Lavra, or Monastery of the Caves. 
Pechersk Lavra was known for its ominous and narrow corridors, where many prominent Orthodox Christians had been buried over the centuries. 
In a ham-handed cold pitch, a KGB agent, who had met Nick in the Sudan, followed him into the catacombs and proposed that he spy for the Soviets. 
“In the movies,” Jack said, “the target surrenders, fearing for his life.” 
In reality, the op had all the power of a wet fart. 
Nick told the sinister agent, “You gotta be shitting me.” 
Nick simply walked out of the caves, called Jack, and said, “You’re not going to believe what the Russians just tried.” 
Not only did the KGB fail to turn Nick; the CIA removed him from his post at the State Department just to be on the safe side, thereby ensuring he could never be of any value to them, and alerted the US intelligence community of what the Soviets were up to.
In Laos, one of Jack’s best recruits had been a high-ranking Laotian official known as the “Lenin of Laos.” 
“Lenin’s” primary value was to keep the CIA informed about political movements in the Laotian hierarchy. 
Special emphasis was placed on advance warning of any coup attempts.
In Paris, there had been Jacques Rossi, a Polish-French educator. 
A one-time aide to Leon Trotsky and an interpreter for Stalin, from 1936 to 1953 (Stalin’s death) Rossi had labored in the Soviet gulag system. 
Rossi had provided Jack with extensive intelligence on the gulag, and Jack had recognized that exposure of the gulag system presented a powerful propaganda tool. 
He encouraged Rossi to write about it. 
Eventually, Rossi published The Gulag Handbook: An Encyclopedia Dictionary of Soviet Penitentiary Institutions and Terms Related to the Forced Labor Camps, which painted a devastating portrait of the dark side of the workers’ paradise.
In Washington, DC, the FBI-CIA joint operation was initially headquartered on the eleventh floor of the Washington Field Office (WFO), which, since 1951, was located in the Old Post Office at 1100 Pennsylvania Avenue NW (now the Trump International Hotel).* In addition to the fifteen members of the CI-4 Squad, more than seven hundred Bureau employees worked in the building—an edifice that was universally considered to be in decrepit condition, with faulty electrical wiring and broken water pipes. 
Agents covered their desks with tarps at the end of each day in order to catch plaster falling from the ceiling. 
“It was a dump, concrete falling all around us,” recalls Dion Rankin, a member of the Squad. 
The FBI agent in charge of the field office called it “the worst space in government.”† The ghost of Chief Crazy Horse was said to live in the basement, where he had been briefly imprisoned. 
The building, which had been slated for demolition a number of times, was home to rats, bats, and roaches. 
“There was no ventilation, so we left windows open. As a consequence, pigeons flew over our heads in the office. But we loved it. It was hysterical.” 
Another fellow agent remembers the only nod to modernity: “We at least had a high-tech secure line to Langley. 
We called it our ‘Cone of Silence.’”
CI-4 and the rest of the field office would soon be moved into the top two floors of a new WFO facility in the Harkins Building (1900 Half Street SW), situated in Buzzard Point on the Anacostia River, across from Bolling Air Force Base. 
For the next seventeen years, the WFO would remain in this area named after turkey buzzards, which are known for picking clean the bones of dead animals, and it is situated on the lowest lying area of the swamp that Washington, DC, was built upon. 
Buzzard Point was the definition of a “lateral move,” with many agents preferring to stay at the centrally located old firetrap.
Two or three days a week, Hav Smith’s officers from Bethesda, like Jack Platt, would trek down to “the Point” to strategize with men like Rankin, who would, per regulation, take the lead on any recruitment operations. 
FBI man Harry Gossett notes that a recruitment pitch often occurred just before a KGB officer was preparing to be rotated out. 
The Bureau had recruited an army of informants working inside convenience stores favored by the Russians—preferences detected through surveillance. 
“The sources helped us with the triple T, the ‘toilet tissue trigger,’” Gossett says. 
“When we learned that the Russians were buying huge amounts of toilet paper, we knew they were headed back to Russia, where the toilet paper is infamous for having the feel of fine sandpaper
You’d know if you ever went there.”
Often after work the staff repaired to what the locals referred to as the “Bilge Bar” on the first floor of the Gangplank Restaurant, a double-decker restaurant-bar at the nearby, newly opened (1977) 360-slip Gangplank Marina, a buoyant trailer park situated on the Washington Channel, which runs beside the Potomac. 
Washington’s only floating restaurant (which cheekily advertised itself as “The Capital’s Finest Floating Restaurant”) was the current hot spot for partying spies, lobbyists, politicians, and even the occasional astronaut
For FBI and CIA personnel, it was a good place to release the tension that naturally went with preventing a nuclear war on a daily basis.
For the first year or so at the WFO, there was little progress. 
Assets were as hard as ever to recruit
“Mostly we just harassed KGB guys incessantly,” Rankin recalls, “by taking their parking places, blocking their parked cars, and, if they tried to lose us on the road, boxing them in on the highway, slow-speed, so they couldn’t take the exit they wanted. 
We once forced Gennady’s fellow KGB officer Alexander Kukhar to drive thirty miles outside Washington when he was trying to get to his apartment in Alexandria. 
He was a hothead, anyway, always trying to outrun us, which is never done. 
But after depositing him somewhere south of Quantico, Virginia, he never tried to lose us again. 
If we couldn’t recruit them, then we just wanted them to give up recruiting us and go home.”
But in late 1978, a glimmer of hope came over Jack’s transom. 
One day first-year undercover case officer Patrick Matthews (a pseudonym) came to Jack with a lead. 
“We got a goddamned winner,” Matthews said. “I was at the Young Diplomats Club with a Russian madman. 
It was a snowstorm, and this character, who claims to be a Soviet diplomat, took me there. 
I met him at a volleyball game—apparently he’s been here over a year. 
He hangs out at volleyball courts near the Pentagon, the Department of the Interior, the Mall—everywhere there are government jocks on their lunch hour and after work. 
I played volleyball and tennis with him last fall. 
Anyway, he said he’d pick me up because he’d been to the club before
We get in the car and there were ten or twelve unpaid parking tickets on the floor. 
He floors it and spins around, doing a full three sixty. He just smiled and said, ‘Ice on street.’ His name is Gennady Vasilenko.”
“This guy was beginning to cut a wide swath around town,” Jack remembered. 
“There was no way in the world I would pass this up. 
I asked HQ for traces on him. 
I got a six-page womb-to-tomb report. 
I knew everything: his ancestry, when he joined the KGB, his blood type—you name it. 
He married up. 
His father-in-law was the father of the Soviet hydrogen bomb. 
I knew a guy in Moscow, Vladimir Piguzov, who had recently been recruited in Indonesia. 
He taught at the KGB school and had access to all the students’ files, which he forwarded to the CIA. 
He got me the school’s internal evaluation of Gennady. 
Piguzov was later outed by a kid I trained, Edward Lee Howard. 
The bastard got him killed.”*
The volleyball-playing Russian was born on December 3, 1941, and from his earliest memories, Gennady Semyovich Vasilenko had a gun in his hands, as he grew up hunting with his hard-drinking father and uncle in the volcano-encircled Siberian city of Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky. 
It was a hardscrabble Russian existence at its most stereotypical: he drank pure alcohol from the age of three, his house had no electricity or gas, and he remembers his first childhood pet—a bear cub—fondly. 
He also remembers skating down a frozen river for two miles every day to attend grade school.
Gennady’s parents had met in Podolsk, where his mother was training to be an accountant
They married when his mother was still in her teens. 
Gennady was the only child of this union, which wasn’t unusual in wartime when soldiers were off getting killed and women were often widowed or remained unmarried. “I was lucky to be born at all!” he says, laughing.
His athleticism came by necessity. 
He learned to ski when he was three years old just to get from place to place in the snow. 
He learned to fish in order to eat
Besides, there was nothing else to do in his small village, so if you were healthy, you explored or did something physical “or else you’d go crazy.”
His pet bear grew so fast Gennady noticed the difference from day to day. 
Still, the boy counted the bear as a friend and was too young to understand mundane concepts such as the nature of the beast. 
One day he was playing with the bear in the river and it pounced on him, nearly drowning him. 
Fortunately, a soldier happened to be walking by, witnessed the struggle, and threw the bear off the boy, saving his life. 
When Gennady’s father got home, he shot the bear
“I’ve always been lucky,” Gennady says.
Gennady’s father was born in Siberia too and was a literature teacher who wrote poetry. He was a warm man despite his lot in life, and Gennady adored him. 
In fact, there is not a trace of bitterness in Gennady’s voice toward his parents and the harsh conditions of his childhood. 
As any reader of Russian literature knows, seething outrage is suffused throughout the culture over the country’s hundreds of years of war, not to mention its miserable climate and woeful economic conditions. 
However, if the Platts had the gene for alcoholism, the Vasilenkos possessed a life spark, resilience, and practical optimism that overrode their conditions.
And, of course, there was the Vasilenko luck. 
During World War II, Gennady’s father was fighting the Japanese in the Kuril Islands, serving in an artillery battalion. 
He was shouting orders during a particularly vicious advance, and with his mouth agape, a piece of shrapnel tore through one cheek and flew out the other—amazingly damaging very little besides skin. 
“He was lucky he was shouting at that moment,” Gennady says.
Not even World War II made the Vasilenkos angry toward their country and leadership
Gennady explained that the Russians were constantly in peril, at that time against Hitler, who had invaded the Motherland. 
Of course, they knew Stalin was a brutal man, but he had to be to fight Hitler, they concluded
Even when Khrushchev denounced Stalin in the early 1950s, the Vasilenkos, like so many other Russians, were skeptical
They figured the smear job was just Soviet bureaucratic nonsense. 
It took generations for the facts about Stalin’s genocidal policies to convert from data points into accepted reality. “When the Nazis are outside your village, you hate the Nazis and fight ‘for the Motherland and Stalin.’”
After the war, Gennady’s father was stationed in Potsdam, where he met another woman. 
He divorced Gennady’s mother, had another family (a set of fraternal twins and another boy), and moved to the Black Sea city of Gudauta, where he became a regional military commandant
Gennady traveled there and met his half siblings a few times
He doesn’t express a sense of trauma about the breakup of his family, shrugging it off as a common condition of Russian existence during that period
This may explain his resilience during the operatic personal life he came to live as an adult.
When he was in grade school, Gennady moved with his mother closer to Moscow, where she found a job near where her sister lived
Gennady then began to channel his raw athleticism into all manner of organized sports: skiing, hockey, tennis, track and field, basketball, soccer, and gymnastics. 
Despite the lack of social sophistication associated with his upbringing in the country, he found that wilderness children actually had an athletic advantage over city kids. 
Without a trace of inferiority, the increasingly charismatic Gennady came into his own in the big city.
As a young adult, the six-foot-two, athletic, and handsome Gennady was drafted onto the Soviet Olympic volleyball team in 1964 (the Tokyo Summer Games was the first Olympics to include the sport), but he was sidelined by a shoulder injury. 
However, the strapping playboy-athlete went on to become a member of the KGB-sponsored Dynamo team and a telecommunications and engineering major at the I. V. Kurchatov Institute of Atomic Energy, which he attended in order to avoid the draft
While he was no technology savant, this basic training would come in handy years later when he handled National Security Agency turncoat Ronald Pelton.
Gennady first saw Irina Goncharova on a bus on the way to the Institute. 
“I liked her from the first glance.” 
It turned out that she had the same destination. 
He began searching for her at the Institute, which was a challenge given it was set on hundreds of acres with many buildings containing labyrinthine passageways. 
Eventually, Gennady, as always, got lucky
He spotted Irina in the Institute cafeteria and recognized some of the people she was eating with. Goncharova? As in Vladimir Goncharov? Royalty. 
The Siberian wild child deep within him had a pang of insecurity. 
But just one pang—after all, he was the blessed Gennady, who deserved only good things. 
Why not him? He inquired about Irina, arranged to be on the same bus, and walked her from her stop to her house in Sokol
They were married a year and a half later.
Upon his 1968 graduation, with wife Irina and baby daughter Julia (pronounced “Yu-lee-ah”) in tow, he was successfully recruited by the KGB. 
Gennady chuckles. 
“I was the only guy who got into the KGB on a sports scholarship.” 
That his father-in-law was such a big shot didn’t hurt either.
While at the Yuri Andropov Institute at Yurlovo, Gennady specialized in telecommunications, computer studies, and engineering, instructed by many of the USSR’s heroes, the very spies who had worked with Western turncoats such as Kim Philby, Guy Burgess, and the Rosenbergs
These teachers constantly referred to the US government, but not its people, as the “main enemy.”
There was, of course, a great emphasis on field training at Yurlovo. 
In this regard, the Russians were the most intense, craftiest, and even harshest in the world. 
When the trainees were on a supposed break from studies, perhaps enjoying some leisure time in Moscow with no documentation, their superiors would often leak false criminal evidence about them to the local police, who would then proceed to roll them up like common criminals
“They wanted to see if you could figure it out, how you could handle tough situations,” Gennady says. 
“If you admitted being KGB, you were out.” 
The watchword was “Deny everything.”
Upon graduation in 1974, Gennady began his first posting at the KGB’s Yasenevo headquarters, Department 3, the Africa and Asia division. 
Nicknamed both “The Woods” and “Little Langley,” the Yasenevo HQ was situated in a forest on the Volga River, southwest of central Moscow. All roads to the high-concrete-walled compound were marked with the same sign, SANITARY ZONE, while the gated entrance bore the plaque SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION CENTER. 
Author David Wise, the only Western journalist to be allowed to visit the “Russian Langley,” wrote, “Physically, the parallels with the rival Central Intelligence Agency are remarkable. 
Like the CIA, the espionage directorate is out in the woods, away from the capital.”
Inside the walls were a bucolic park, tennis courts, a soccer field, and a large fountain stocked with KGB chief Vladimir Kryuchkov’s prized ducks. 
Of course, the chief had to advertise more than his soft side: he regularly ordered that crows be shot and hung by their feet from the trees that surrounded the fountain to remind potential turncoats of their fate. 
Much like at the CIA’s home base in McLean, Virginia, KGB agents could be seen jogging near the complex at all hours.
At the center of the park was the nucleus of the complex, a twenty-story building (described as “soulless modern” by KGB officer Victor Cherkashin) that included conference halls, a gym, and an indoor swimming pool
At Yasenevo, Gennady made many lifelong friends, especially in the Africa department, which was in a small room shared by three agents. 
His closest friend was fellow volleyball player Aleksandr Zaporozhsky, who would be rotated to Africa after his term at Yasenevo. 
Although he and Gennady would be separated by thousands of miles, they managed to keep in touch over the years as their lives played out in overlapping dramas. 
These dramas would collide three decades later, involving two of the century’s most damaging espionage cases.
Occasionally Gennady was sent to work at the KGB’s fearsome Lubyanka complex at 2 Dzerzhinsky Square, Moscow—fearsome because it housed a basement prison that was made to order for torture and summary executions, which is exactly what it was used for during the Revolution and the early days of the KGB. 
A local woman, who became a KGB folk figure known as the “Cellar Babushka,” was hired solely to clean up the bloody messes. 
Similar executions had been performed at the notorious Lefortovo Prison located on the outskirts of Moscow.
In late 1977, under the guise of a diplomat, Gennady was assigned to the coveted post of counterintelligence (Line KR) agent at the KGB’s Washington, DC, rezidentura. 
He took an apartment in Arlington, Virginia, for his growing family, which now included Julia’s younger brother, Ilya. 
The romantic portrayal of espionage evaporated almost as soon as Gennady’s cab dropped him off at the Soviet Embassy at 1125 16th Street NW, four blocks north of the White House. 
(Years later, the cheeky Americans would name the intersection “Andrei Sakharov Plaza,” after the dissident Soviet scientist who had been exiled to the forbidden city of Gorky in the 1980s.) 
It was the largest embassy in Washington, employing more than five hundred people, many of whom came into the office at night because during the day “everybody was out spying.”
Once inside the embassy, Gennady was directed to the rezidentura, located on the fourth floor, in the back, down a narrow, poorly lit corridor. 
He was instructed to always hang any coat he carried in a hallway closet in order to prevent him and any colleagues from secreting CIA-furnished spy gadgetry into the workplace. 
On a digital clock outside a nondescript door, Gennady typed in a code he had been given, unlocking the thick steel entrance to the enclave. 
That’s when the dreariness of his real-world spy job hit him.
Dozens of agents were crammed into a single, eight-hundred-square-foot room. 
On entry into the anteroom, an agent was greeted by a large map of the Maryland-DC-Virginia area, onto which operatives had marked their next covert meetings, drop-offs, etc., signed with their code names. 
This map would prove to be a goldmine for the CIA when it placed its own assets inside the facility. 
In his memoir Washington Station, KGB agent Yuri Shvets described the rest of the rezidentura:
Everyone… had to work in incredibly tight quarters. 
Thin partitions divided the residency into four extremely small rooms, tiny as birdcages, which accommodated its four sections: Political Intelligence, External Counterintelligence, Scientific and Technological Intelligence, and Technical Operations. 
All of which explains why Gennady immediately turned on his heel and ran out to play volleyball at the State Department. 
But before lacing up his Converse All Stars, he presented himself to the recently appointed rezident, Major General Dmitri Yakushkin, a beret-wearing, hulking, six-foot-four man of surprising refinement. 
With a degree in economic science, Yakushkin was a highly cultured spy from a prominent Russian family and was known to be concerned with human rights and arms control. 
He was also a workaholic, putting in twelve-hour days at the rezidentura. 
He and his KGB-translator wife, Irene, wary of being targeted by the “main enemy,” almost never socialized. 
Their only known recreation was an occasional weekend visit to the recently purchased forty-five-acre Russian retreat in Centreville, Maryland, on the state’s Eastern Shore—the very one President Obama would order the Russians to vacate in 2016 after they hacked the DNC’s emails.
Gennady would enjoy a father-son relationship with Yakushkin, but he regularly tested his boss’s nerves. 
One day, shortly after Gennady received a promotion, he decided to screw with Yakushkin. 
He borrowed an embassy security guard’s uniform and on a lapel affixed the star he had received—which for a spy was supposed to be hidden away in a drawer. He then loaded up the uniform with every ornament he could find and burst into Yakushkin’s office, shouting, “KGB spy Vasilenko reporting for duty, sir!” Given that the whole idea of being a spy was to be subtle, Yakushkin shouted, “You stupid motherfucker!” Gennady pretended he didn’t understand why his boss was so angry. “But I went all the way back to Moscow to get this undercover uniform!” Gennady exclaimed. 
Yakushkin then recognized it was a joke, broke out in laughter, and opened up a bottle of Dimple, his favorite scotch. 
Still, he knew Gennady was a problem child at heart.
Whatever Americans have come to think of KGB agents as a result of Hollywood portrayals, Gennady did not fit anyone’s image of a spy. 
Westerners are inclined to imagine that Russian agents are as cold as Siberia, utterly devoid of individual humanity—think assassins from an Ian Fleming thriller, like the chiseled, blond, robotic killer Grant in From Russia with Love, or Xenia Onatopp in GoldenEye, who strangled men with her thighs, her pulse barely elevated. 
Or Vladimir Putin. 
These stereotypes echoed in the American consciousness for decades, all brutality and ruthlessness.
But Gennady was all open-faced charm. 
Not in the unctuous sense of a cinematic smooth operator, but with the lovability of a big brother to whom you could tell things that your parents would never understand. 
Despite being married, Gennady liked women and pursued them habitually—a pastime he attributes to growing up in a town where all the men had been lost during the war, leaving him with the enviable thirty-to-one ratio of women to men. 
And these poor women craved some attention, Gennady would argue. 
In fact, as a young teen, Gennady was practically preyed upon by older women on a daily basis. 
(“He was the village stud” was the way one friend described Gennady’s childhood.) 
The experience taught him the power of seduction and sexuality by the time he was twelve. 
So, as an adult, he became a seducer at heart, even when the seduction was fraternal, not sexual. 
Smiling Gennady could make a traitor feel positively buoyant about betraying his country, as if becoming a turncoat were nothing more than a senior prank. 
It was Gennady’s Western-style warmth and intramural athleticism that made him a perfect operative to place in Washington, DC. 
His interpersonal talents called to mind the telltale passage in F. 
Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby:
He smiled understandingly—much more than understandingly. 
It was one of those rare smiles with a quality of eternal reassurance that you may come across four or five times in life. 
It faced—or seemed to face—the whole external world for an instant, and then concentrated on you with an irresistible prejudice in your favor. 
It understood you just so far as you wanted to be understood, believed in you as you would like to believe in yourself, and assured you that it had precisely the impression of you that, at your best, you hoped to convey. 
Of course, Gennady’s almost frenzied joie de vivre would regularly place him in the crosshairs of his dutiful Spartan boss, Yakushkin—much like another man who often ran afoul of his bosses in the SE Division, a man Gennady would come to know as “Chris,” and a man who would change Gennady’s life.
“After reading the dossier, I sat down with [Patrick] Matthews,” Jack said. 
“I said, ‘I can get in with him by my experience with Carlos the Jackal. 
He would be interested in that. 
Also, he’s a gun aficionado, like me. 
Tell him my name is Chris.’” Since the chain-smoking Jack wasn’t about to challenge the Russian to a game of volleyball, he had to come up with another entrée. 
Jack had a connection at the shiny new Capital Centre sports venue who could score tickets for him on short notice, so he checked the arena’s schedule and instructed Matthews as to what to tell the Russian. 
Matthews, posing as a businessman, dutifully arranged the meet-up, telling Gennady, “My friend Chris can get us tickets to the Globetrotters. Bring your son.” 
Patrick had met Gennady’s eight-year-old son previously. 
He lied that he didn’t know exactly where Chris worked. 
Gennady happily accepted the offer.
