Chapter 18 - End Games

You really get to know your friend when trouble comes. 
  —Russian proverb

The plane carrying the two old Russian friends, Gennady “MONOLITE” Vasilenko and Aleksandr “AVENGER” Zaporozhsky, landed in Washington, DC, at about 5:30 p.m., Friday, July 9, 2010. Cowboy raced to meet Gennady at Dulles that afternoon, having been tipped by another insider friend as to the exact time and place of their arrival. Finally, his crazy Musketeer cohort was free—or was he? In what he would later deem “another typical CIA screw-up,” Cowboy had been told by his intermediary to go to the international arrivals terminal to greet his Russian frenemy. Through Dulles’s floor-to-ceiling terminal windows, Cowboy excitedly watched the FBI’s Vision charter touch down—however, the plane just kept taxiing to the farthest end of the airport, perhaps a half a mile away, toward the Signature Fixed Base Operator Facilities, which often handled private government contracts.
At the distant terminal, the maroon-and-white Boeing 767 rolled to a stop a few feet away from a waiting cavalcade of SUVs belonging to representatives of the FBI, the State Department, and the CIA. Cowboy began speed-walking in Signature’s direction as fast as his seventy-four-year-old legs would carry him, uncertain if Gennady was even on the charter as promised, and also unaware that Kohler had already handed Gennady and Aleksandr over to the CIA on the tarmac. By the time Cowboy arrived at Signature, thoroughly out of breath and nearing collapse, he saw that the motorcade was long gone. A typical IOC fast getaway, probably orchestrated by Zephyrs he had taught years earlier, Cowboy thought, cursing himself out for being such a good instructor. He turned to leave when he saw Kohler passing through the lobby.
“I told him ‘Gennady’s here. He’s okay,’” Kohler says. “That’s the last time I saw Jack.”

That night, Jack had a nightmare that the wily FSB had decided to keep Gennady, and they had sent an Illegal look-alike in his place. He awoke to a call from another Agency contact that gave him the address of the safe house where his old friend was indeed waiting. Within hours, Jack and Gennady had their long-intended reunion in a nondescript suburban Maryland colonial, both laughing at yesterday’s screw-up. Michelle Platt, who would also soon be reunited with the Russian, recalls, “Gennady looked like a skeleton.”
“What took you so long?” said Gennady, echoing what he had said to Jack in that Guyana hotel a lifetime ago, as the two men bear-hugged.
“I went to the wrong terminal,” Jack said. 
“Your Agency still playing games with you?” joked Gennady. 
“Fuck ’em.” 
“What now?” they asked each other. Jack said, “We go shooting and fishing. We’ll throw a party, with Dion, Mad Dog, Bobby De Niro, Moldea, the whole gang.”
“Yes, but first—I earned a good bottle of vodka,” Gennady answered.

Back in Moscow that day, Russia’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs confirmed the exchange of the four prisoners for ten Russian citizens, citing “humanitarian considerations and constructive partnership development.” The Western news reports of the swap all noted the espionage connections of Sutyagin, Skripal, and Zaporozhsky but were confounded by the inclusion of one Gennady Vasilenko. NBC News coverage of Gennady was typical: “Reasons for his involvement weren’t immediately clear.”*
The great 2010 spy swap ultimately succeeded because it fell within a temporary “reset” period (2009–2014), which, as Sulick and others predicted, foundered when Russia annexed Crimea in 2014. Had the Illegals been captured before or after the reset, the US-Russian “constructive partnership” would have been nonexistent, rendering the swap not even worthy of consideration, sending Anna Chapman and the others to a supermax concrete vault and leaving Gennady to die in a Russian hellhole like Bor. “I was lucky three times,” Gennady observes now. “I survived that bear that almost drowned me. I decided not to jump overboard after my Havana arrest because I decided to believe Jack, that he would never record me, and I got out of prison in 2010.”
After a few days, the Agency took Gennady to Rosslyn, Virginia, and set him up with a first-class apartment. Although his living conditions had improved exponentially, Gennady’s emotional health was not such an easy fix. “His cockiness and bravado were gone, and he seemed confused,” recalls Michelle, who helped him set up his apartment. Although he had his freedom and Cowboy and the Platt family, Gennady had lost everything else: his wife, his girlfriend, his six children, his mother, his homeland that he loved, and his reputation as a loyal intelligence officer for the KGB; being forced to sign that deceitful confession in Lefortovo was a decision that will always haunt him. His mood greatly brightened when Michelle introduced him to Skype. “He cried because he never thought he’d see his family again,” Michelle says. “We raced out immediately to buy him a laptop.”
In the weeks ahead, at the Agency’s request, Michelle helped Gennady write a report about Russian prison corruption, and in future years he would visit FBI field offices to offer expertise on Russian organized crime. Over the next year, Masha and her three children with Gennady arrived in the US, and Gennady’s oldest children, Julia and Ilya, his estranged wife Irina, and his mother all did the same in the summer of 2011—one big, barely functional Russian clan living in very un-Russian Virginia. At Jack’s direction, HTG’s Roy Jacobsen (also a real estate broker) helped Gennady find a house, picking one that was secure and had multiple exits. He also made sure the property had room for a shooting range, and he helped Gennady improve his accuracy with various firearms in case things got rough. With a push from the FBI, Gennady speedily got a concealed carry permit. With funds from the Agency, he paid $900,000 for the house. Cash.
It would be a happy ending if the story was a Hollywood movie, but it is not. The spy swap resolution was bittersweet, at best. Although this was a joyful outcome for Jack, Gennady, Dion, and Mad Dog, from the perspective of the Vasilenko children, the uprooting was traumatizing. Jack is adored by his wife and children, yet Gennady’s adult children, Julia and Ilya, were forced, by no fault of their own, to abandon their careers, friends, and homeland because of their father’s choices. Mike Rochford watched the transfer play out and recalls, “Gennady’s kids are victims. They didn’t want to come to the US—they had to.” It is the rarely seen side of a life in espionage, a side the families of Zaporozhsky, Stepanov, Poteyev, the Illegals, and the others also experienced. The cumulative effect of years of spy-family exfiltrations keeps the social workers and resettlement specialists at the CIA and the FBI working overtime. In the spy universe, somebody somewhere is always paying a price.
It seems that Ilya has been the most affected by all the unsought espionage—and marital—drama, not to mention the effect of having grown up with an absentee father. After a lifetime of coping with Gennady’s happy-go-lucky unfaithfulness to Ilya’s beloved mother, Irina, and the shock of meeting his father’s second family—with Ilya’s childhood friend, Masha!—Gennady and Ilya are now separated by a vast emotional chasm. They live near each other and attend family functions together, where they are cordial. But Ilya makes it clear to his adoring father that cordial is about all he can muster toward him and, especially, Masha, whom he blames for the fiasco as much as his father. And who could argue with him? It’s obvious to all that Gennady worships his children, especially Ilya, but he also understands that the lack of reciprocation is a form of punishment for the life choices he made. In his own Gennady way, he loves all his family, Irina included.
Although neither the CIA nor the Vasilenkos can discuss it, the extended family’s financial needs and permanent green cards have been taken care of by the US government, perhaps as much as a favor to Cowboy Jack for his key role in the Hanssen unmasking as to Gennady for his inadvertent contribution of signing off on Stepanov’s passport application. The CIA is the only government agency that can negotiate to compensate assets for information. Another codicil to Public Law 110, part of the 1949 Central Intelligence Agency Act, states that the CIA can also handle defectors outside normal immigration procedures, hence the instant green cards. Families like the Vasilenkos typically receive housing, green cards, a monthly stipend, and free education for the entire family, even one as large as Gennady’s. Sundry details fall under the jurisdiction of the CIA’s National Resettlement Operations Center, or NROC. When his stipend hit, Gennady purchased his country home, spacious but not elegant.

One by one, and sometimes two by two, Gennady’s Musketeer pals, Cowboy, Dion, and Mad Dog, trekked to his rural Virginia house—likely the only one with a dacha-style sauna and shooting range in the adjacent woods. Likewise, the HTG partners—Cowboy, Ben Wickham, Bob Olds, and Roy Jacobsen—often held court at the Old Brogue in Great Falls, welcoming Gennady to the US. The Shoffler Brunch gang also joined the rolling reunion fest. “On October 17, 2010,” recalls Dan Moldea, “I saw Gennady at the Shoffler Brunch for the first time since his release from the Russian prison and the prisoner swap three months earlier. Vasilenko was Platt’s guest at the brunch. He physically embraced me and expressed his gratitude for the roles that Fino and I had played on his behalf.” For Gennady, at least, America was starting to feel like home.
Of course, “Bobby D” was never far away, and Jack and Gennady soon reunited with the actor at his New York apartment. In the fall of 2011, De Niro called Gennady with an offer. Since his Russian friend had missed out on his chance at the big time with The Good Shepherd, De Niro thought he might join him on an actual movie set in Philadelphia. “Bob asked if I wanted to see how a movie got made,” Gennady says. On the set, the actor was once again taken with Gennady’s photogenic charisma and immediately sent him to the wardrobe department in order to prep him for a walk-on role in Silver Linings Playbook. (Gennady is the tuxedoed man who retrieves the judges’ scorecards after the climactic dance scene.)
Two years later, in August 2013, Jack and Gennady attended Bobby D’s seventieth birthday bash, held at his eighty-five-acre Gardiner, New York, estate. There, the Musketeers dined on food catered by Nobu Restaurant—which De Niro co-owns—and partied with the likes of Christopher Walken, Harvey Keitel, Samuel L. Jackson, Keith Richards, Bradley Cooper, Leonardo DiCaprio, Sean Penn, Lee Daniels, Martin Scorsese, and Lenny Kravitz, who performed live.
Jack once brought HTG cofounder Roy Jacobsen and his daughter, Jen, to New York for her to sing her rendition of Carly Simon’s “The Spy Who Loved Me” (lyrics altered to reflect the saga of Jack and Genya) to De Niro. At Penn Station, preparing their trip back to Washington, Jack realized he had forgotten his wallet and was worried that he might need it on the train. Roy asked Jack if he knew anybody in security at Penn Station.
“Fuck, I trained most of them,” Jack said. 
Jack walked up to the first security guard, who spoke up before Jack could open his mouth: “Jack, Jack Platt!” He escorted the party down to the train before the other passengers.

Shortly thereafter, Cowboy began working with the authors on this book, and it wasn’t unusual for him to call for an impromptu lunch over chili (his favorite) at the Hunter’s Inn in Potomac, Maryland, to impart another war story he felt should be included. In addition to the ever-present cowboy hat, he often wore some article of clothing bearing the eagle, globe, and anchor insignia of his beloved Marine corps. He particularly liked the way the Marines credo, SEMPER FIDELIS, sprung from the eagle’s beak, and he never tired of pointing to it or reminding a listener that the eagle was saying “Always faithful.” His voice would grow soft and vulnerable whenever he spoke about his father or the fate of the US, “this fragile experiment.” Despite his enthusiasm for recounting details of his life story, Cowboy was becoming noticeably thinner.
His stance toward the Russians had gradually become more nuanced. Rather than wanting to “crush” them, he began to say things like “They can’t help it. It was their system.” He took a harder line on the Islamic fundamentalists who captured global attention after his retirement from the Agency. Whereas he believed that the US and Russian people never truly wanted to kill one another (as opposed to their political systems, which did), he thought the Islamists were a death cult that would not rest until the West lay in ruins. His sentiments toward terrorists conjured up an aging Wild West sheriff flirting with rounding up one last posse before he rode into the sunset.
Cowboy was a proponent of a vigorous US intelligence apparatus till the end. He believed that a flawed spy service was far preferable to having none at all. Unlike the news media that was forever bashing the CIA for its missteps, he recognized that failure was an inherent part of the game the same way trauma surgeons sometimes lose patients, and he resented the chin-scratching critics who had never been on the ground, in the fight, in the vortex of crosscurrents far greater than any individual. He pumped a fist in agreement with Jack Nicholson’s fictional Marine colonel Nathan Jessup in A Few Good Men when he barked “You want me on that wall!” to the meddling, smart-ass young prosecutor played by Tom Cruise. Unlike Jack Nicholson, Jack Platt really was perched off the Cuban coast during the missile crisis, ready to storm ashore when the nukes started flying. The United States wanted him on that metaphorical wall, and he spent well over a half century astride it.
Nevertheless, having long ago replaced alcohol with philosophy, Cowboy believed in asking tough questions of the trade he loved—not to destroy it, but to make it better. He wondered if the intelligence bureaucracies hadn’t become a “self-licking ice cream cone,” emphasizing bureaucratic perpetuation over stopping enemies. Hell, they didn’t even like using the word “enemies” anymore, preferring diluted, new age gibberish like “stakeholders.” The problematic cohort were “cake eaters,” overeducated but under-muscled résumé sculptors whose internationalist pretensions rendered them blind to the reality that the US did have dangerous adversaries richly in need of being spied on. He pointed to US assets like Motorin and Martynov, who lost their lives because both the Americans and the Russians were too busy chasing each other’s spies rather than preventing nuclear war—a holocaust neither side ever truly wanted.
Cowboy Jack was not alone in his sober assessment of the state of modern espionage. In his book American Spies, former Clandestine Service Chief Michael Sulick cited the tragedy of one particular spy: “[Aldrich] Ames proved that spies rarely change history… his espionage had no impact on the outcome of the Cold War… other overwhelming problems afflicting the Soviet empire ultimately caused its downfall.” Author David Wise labeled the entire CIA “a tired bureaucracy.”
Cowboy and Gennady agreed (with more than a little exasperation) that all intelligence services suffer the same paradox: they send an operative abroad to infiltrate enemy ranks and then distrust the operative the closer he gets to the enemy, for fear he has grown too close. “What the fuck?” both men said more than once. Gennady was as agitated about the state of Russia’s affairs as Jack was about the United States’. Gennady said, “The old days were one hundred percent better. If someone had a gun, they’d tear up the whole country looking for it. Now there are millions of guns on the streets, and they’re using them… The future of Russia is hard to tell. But we are survivors with a long, long history.”
About Jack, Gennady said, “At the beginning we looked at each other through a rifle scope like an enemy. After a while we looked at each other not through a scope, but man to man, eye to eye.” And this is how both men determined that while their countries’ ideologies were opposed, their citizens were not inherently enemies.

After months of immersing themselves in Cold War spy history, especially Jack’s and Gennady’s, the authors were haunted by a central question involving failure. “All of this spying…” Eric began at one of the authors’ lunches with the Boys. “It seems like both sides fail an awful lot.” Indeed, the Boys failed to turn each other, the US failed to detect Ames, Hanssen, and others, the Russian Illegals failed to do much damage, and the FBI’s vaunted tunnel drilled beneath the Soviet Embassy in Washington was used against it.
“So what’s the point?” Gus asked. 
Jack’s and Gennady’s answers differed. Gennady said, “Nobody wins,” and he invoked the Kris Kristofferson song of the same name, which refers to the folly of placing blame on one side or the other, and that the mutual pain isn’t worth it since nobody wins anyway. It was a song Roy Jacobsen used to play for retired spooks at get-togethers, which often triggered tears that flowed along with the booze. Jack said, “You pound away at each other however you can for as long as you can. You wear the other side down, and one day, one side just doesn’t show up.
“Ames…” Jack snarled the name. “Ames gutted us. After he did what he did, a lot of the folks at the Agency felt like giving up. Some of them probably did.” Jack said that we will never know how many CIA programs didn’t go forward because the CIA felt so demoralized. “That’s what I mean by one side just doesn’t show up.” Jack growled something about wanting five minutes alone in a room with Ames and Hanssen. He meant it, too.
Jack caught himself. “Then again, one day the Soviet Union didn’t show up because it didn’t exist.”
The Boys bickered constantly about the direction of their two countries. Jack barked that the Russians were still Commies. Gennady countered that Russia was a “banditocracy.” He prefers the Soviet Union pre-collapse to what the country has become. Jack said democracy prevailed, but only temporarily, as he saw totalitarianism creeping into the same American culture that championed freedom. No one enjoys America’s freedoms more than Gennady: “In America, they didn’t kidnap me and beat me and throw me in prison,” he shouted with a rare flash of bitterness in his eyes. He had a habit of tapping Eric on the shoulder to show him the photos on his iPhone of firearms he thought Eric ought to come shoot with him. “Bobby [De Niro] likes this kind,” Gennady said. What’s not for Gennady to like about America? Girls. Guns. Movie stars!
A few weeks later, Jack dropped by Eric’s house. He had something on his mind. It was this notion of Gennady’s that “nobody wins.”
“We won!” Jack insisted. 
“Who’s ‘we’?” Eric asked. 
“Genya and me. We won. How many people get a friend like Genya? How many men are ordered to destroy each other and end up—” Jack’s voice cracked.
“I get it,” Eric said, adding, “Do you think you can expand that sentiment to a friendship between America and Russia?”
“Not yet,” Jack said. “Russia is still pretty Communist if you ask me, and America is headed in that direction faster than I ever imagined it would.” He cited the November 1775 establishment of the United States Marines to fight for the young country’s independence from Britain, and he feared the US had lost any sense of its origins, any appreciation of what freedom means. But when the trajectory of the US began to depress him, he defaulted to his admiration for Gennady and the price he had paid to get here, not to mention the price he had paid for their friendship.
Despite the danger of the Cold War with its ever-present thrum of nuclear conflict just below the surface—a danger the Boys had embraced—to see them together was to sense their Cold War had had a soul. It was a world of rowdy soldiers, jocks, lotharios, Machiavellis, venal cops, bitter bureaucrats wearing porno moustaches and aviator frames to look like badasses, flying fortresses, and floating Leviathans.
Today’s spy game is characterized by sterile drones, faceless hackers, and treacherous nebbishes like Edward Snowden—people Jack and Gennady would have mistaken for dental floss. The Boys are dinosaurs, but the joy they exuded in each other’s presence was palpable. They were on the downslope of history—the history experienced by the billions who lived through the Cold War and who still roam the planet, from the Iron Curtain to the collapse of the Berlin Wall. Both men were sentimental, but despite Gennady’s assertion that “nobody wins” and Jack’s fear of creeping totalitarianism in the US, one sensed that both men felt, as individuals and perhaps as the oddest couple the Cold War produced, that they were victors.
Gennady and Jack had their share of tough talks about capitalism versus communism. Neither ever wavered. Gennady still said of communism that “the idea was good” but was implemented poorly. This exasperated Cowboy because he thought the system was, as President Ronald Reagan said, “an evil empire.”
When it came to reflections about his own nature, Gennady was predictably Gennady: “If I had to do it all over again, I would have done the same thing. I can’t change my character. Maybe I’d make a few less mistakes, mostly with women.” But the twinkle in his eye suggested he didn’t feel that guilty, as if self-reflection was a disease that weakened one’s emotional immune system. Gennady is still handsome, carefree, immature, charming, irresponsible, insouciant. He scoffs at the notion that he was ever heroic. “But Jack, that’s different. He’s a true American hero.” He described Jack as a staunch anti-Communist, a first-rate CIA officer, and, most important, a Marine to the core. “The American eagle!”

While recklessness is an authentic aspect of Gennady’s character, there are those in the spy world who believe he has a deeply serious side, that he lives by a strict moral code that isn’t easily deciphered, let alone perceived in him at all. The principals associated with the Hanssen takedown insist that Gennady didn’t know he was helping to nail the traitor and never betrayed the Soviet Union, which is supported by the fact that they were all operating with fragmented information about what Stepanov’s cache really held. Nevertheless, there is an alternative theory to which some in the intelligence community subscribe. This theory is rooted in a spy’s code of honor and the capacity of the human soul—in this case, Gennady’s—for rationalization:

    Imagine being deeply indoctrinated in the belief that your fellow spies in the perpetual war against very real enemies 
    are your true family—perhaps even more than blood family. After all, Russian families may or may not disintegrate, but 
    Russian enemies have been unrelenting for centuries.
    
    Imagine further that there is no lower form of ghoul than a member of your spy fraternity who gets his brethren killed. 
    A craven double agent—an American traitor, no less—who murders your friends from the safety of a cubicle, out of pure greed, 
    and who wouldn’t hesitate to get you killed through the bloodless act of dropping an unsigned note into an envelope and 
    leaving it under a rock in a suburban park.
    
    Now consider that the bureaucracy for whom you toiled for decades not only does nothing to avenge the deaths of your friends
    but, in fact, orchestrated their executions. Yes, they may have been traitors and deserved punishment, but not execution, 
    especially on the word of a known dissembler like Hanssen. Hanssen lied about Gennady and Jack. What lies did he tell about 
    Motorin and Martynov in order to gild his lily? Everybody uses double agents, but nobody trusts them. Traitors like Ames 
    and Hanssen are to the espionage world what “rats” are to the mafia: vermin undeserving of breathing the same air you do. 
    Indeed, gangland rats have been known to get whacked on principle by rival families without formal sanction from mafia brass. 
    Said one US spy to the authors, “We’re in the business of getting strategic intelligence, not getting each other’s spies killed.”
    
   This mindset would support the following theory, which is held by more than a few sources close to the Gennady affair: after 
   Motorin, Martynov, and other KGB assets were killed because of Hanssen’s mendacity, and Hanssen made the false report that Gennady 
   had been “turned” in the late 1980s by the CIA, which led to his first imprisonment, and the KGB rewarded such a monster, Gennady 
   the Russian Cowboy decided to take matters into his own hands and blow up Hanssen himself.

Alas, it’s just spook speculation, but it would be irresponsible to shrug off the conjecture of some spies that Gennady Vasilenko played a long shot and brought down Robert Hanssen to avenge what Hanssen, and most assuredly Sasha Zhomov, did to his friends. His brothers. Said the philosophical assassin Anton Chigurh in Cormac McCarthy’s No Country for Old Men to a target facing his wrath: “If the rule you followed brought you to this, of what use was the rule?” If Gennady’s loyalty brought him so much suffering, and Ames’s and Hanssen’s treachery brought them riches from the KGB, of what use has been his own fidelity?
If this hypothetical scenario is what occurred, then Gennady’s code of honor as a spy was upheld, and the same man who was unfaithful to his wife and family was faithful to his KGB spy brothers, flawed though they be, to degrees that changed history.

To celebrate Gennady’s seventy-sixth birthday, there was a Musketeers reunion—Dion, Gennady, Jack, Mad Dog—in December 2016 in Virginia. It was the last time they would all see each other, as once again, the happy ending was a tease. Another bittersweet dose of real life was waiting around the corner
On Christmas Day 2016, Jack got food caught in his throat at dinner. The blockage was cleared, but he still complained of discomfort within his neck. A medical checkup revealed cancer, which likely explained his weight loss during the last year of his life and his difficulty swallowing. The disease moved fast. On his deathbed, Jack told Roy Jacobsen, “You take care of that son of a bitch,” referring to Gennady.
The family’s obituary for Cowboy read:

    John Cheney Platt III (“Jack”), aged 80, died unexpectedly on January 4, 2017, of an advanced form of esophageal cancer,
    which had presented itself with no symptoms other than weight loss. He passed peacefully and painlessly in his sleep with 
    loving family by his side… He led an amazing life, full of intrigue, mystery, and adventure, which he embraced and lived 
    to the fullest… He was a hero among the Cold War Warriors and a consummate patriot for his beloved country. He was a natural 
    leader, a mentor to many, and did not suffer fools (or bosses) lightly!

A “Celebration of Life” for Jack was held on Friday, February 3, 2017, at 2:00 p.m. at Falcon’s Landing Retirement Community in Potomac Falls, Virginia. In Jack’s honor, donations were made to the US Marine Corps Memorial Association. More than 450 people were in attendance, including his extended family of FBI and CIA officers, among them the operatives who ran the legendary mole hunts: Mike Rochford, Sandy Grimes, and Robert Hanssen’s longtime FBI superior, David Major.
No one had ever seen a send-off for a spy like this one. (“There’s no one manning the store at HQ. They’re all here,” one CIA official said.) The eulogies were powerful in form and content. Some called Jack “the best CIA officer ever, an icon.” Pressed to elaborate, one CIA executive politely declined. But he gave a look that implied that there were many heroic Jack exploits that no one would ever know about.
When his turn came, Rochford read a letter from the assistant director of the FBI Counterintelligence Division:


    [Jack’s] distinguished career in [the] CIA and his lengthy service to the FBI and the US Intelligence community is cherished 
    and will never be forgotten.
    
In a thinly veiled reference to Cowboy’s secret part in the Hanssen roll-up:

    Jack played a key role in the successful resolution of several serious espionage cases and the recruitment of human sources 
    that contributed significantly to the foreign counterintelligence mission of the FBI.

The letter continues:

    He was a true professional in every sense of the word and was still assisting the FBI as Christmas 2016 was approaching.
  
Regarding Jack’s IOC training:

    The FBI will forever be in debt for such professional training…
    Jack had the nickname “Cowboy” for a reason. He was daring, aggressive, fearless, and relentless in his military service 
    with the Marines and his intelligence and counterintelligence operations with the CIA and the FBI. He always stood up 
    for what he believed and never wavered from the mission that became his life’s work. However, Jack will always be remembered 
    more for his humanity: his love for his family, friends, and country, and his friendly, unpretentious, and honest approach 
    to his colleagues. Jack’s stories and anecdotes are legendary and whenever his family and friends come together, I trust 
    they will be told and retold in his memory.

A moving slide show was played, called “Cowboy,” to Jack’s favorite song, “American Pie.” Jen Jacobsen, daughter of HTG cofounder Roy Jacobsen, sang her appropriately customized version of “Nobody Does It Better” while looking at Gennady, the spy Jack had loved, at the front table. The Russian wept.
Robert De Niro gave a short and loving tribute. He had appeared on The View just two hours earlier in New York, then raced to a private plane to get to the Virginia event in time to honor his friend. Afterward, Gennady and De Niro snuck away and got lost in tequila. Four months later, a more intimate final celebration of Cowboy’s life was held at the Old Brogue on Saturday, June 17, in the Snuggery Room. About seventy-five attended. Dion Rankin recalled how Jack would crush out his cigarette on his boot heel, leaving ash on the carpet of Paul Redmond’s CIA office. Polly’s daughters, Antonia and Sashy Bogdanovich, spoke, as did Paige, Michelle, Diana, Leigh, and grandson Cody. Gennady openly stated that his relationship with Jack had landed him in the gulag and had gotten him freed. Then, using a phrase he appropriated a lifetime ago from Cowboy: “Shit happens.” When the party broke up, Gennady grabbed his son Ilya, who made a rare appearance, and, eyes welling up, kissed him hard. No words were spoken.


In June 2011, the Moscow District Military Court found Aleksandr Poteyev, the man who had sold out the Illegals, guilty of high treason and desertion and sentenced him to twenty-five years in prison in a trial that, like Gennady’s, was closed to the public. His wife was called as a witness. One of the other witnesses who testified against Poteyev was Anna Chapman. She told the tribunal that she had become suspicious of him after an undercover FBI agent contacted her in New York using a secret code word that only Poteyev would have known. At the time, Poteyev had been stationed in Moscow overseeing the Illegals operation. In addition to treason, the military court found Poteyev guilty of desertion. He was sentenced in absentia to twenty-five years in prison and stripped of his medals, military rank, and pension. Poteyev was not present at his own trial because he had fled Russia shortly before the Illegals were arrested in June 2010, relocating in the US, where he was given a new identity. According to one unverified Russian news service, Poteyev passed away in July 2016. 
Aleksandr Zaporozhsky and Anatoly Stepanov are also living with new identities somewhere in the US. Of the group of ex-KGB agents that flipped since the Ames case, only Gennady Vasilenko, who was never a traitor to his homeland, lives under his real name, not far from the Platt family home. Until Jack’s sudden passing in early 2017, the duo saw each other almost every day.
Aldrich “Rick” Ames’s communications are tightly monitored at the Federal Correctional Institution in Indiana, where he is serving a life sentence. Robert Hanssen negotiated a plea bargain that enabled him to escape the death penalty in exchange for cooperating with authorities. On May 10, 2002, he was sentenced to fifteen consecutive sentences of life without the possibility of parole. In his federal supermax prison in Colorado, he is in solitary confinement for twenty-three hours a day. Edward Lee Howard died on July 12, 2002, at his Russian dacha, reportedly from a broken neck after a fall. Ronald Pelton was tried and convicted of espionage in 1986 and sentenced to three concurrent life sentences and a one-hundred-dollar fine. Under sentencing rules in place at the time, Pelton was presumptively entitled to release on parole after thirty years in custody. After serving out his term at the Federal Correctional Institution, Allenwood, a medium-security facility in Pennsylvania, he was released on November 24, 2015.
 
In June 2016, Mikhail Fradkov, the SVR chief who negotiated Gennady’s swap with the CIA’s Panetta in 2010, and who ran a think tank in Moscow after leaving the SVR, suggested a cyber hack of the US election to President Vladimir Putin. According to the US intelligence community, the Russian hack was implemented, and it is being investigated as of this writing, affecting every move the nascent Trump administration makes (assuming said administration still exists when this book is published). Incredibly, Russia is dominating the US news on a scale rivaling twentieth-century Cold War coverage. If the US won the Cold War with the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Russians are displaying an impressive capacity to rise from the ashes. In the absence of “burying” the US, as Khrushchev vowed, Putin is succeeding, at the very least, in fomenting political chaos in our dysfunctional republic. As both Cowboy and Gennady often said, a country that has had nearly a millennium of war has a lot of resilience. And patience. Softly, softly, catchee monkey. 
If Cowboy was the patriotic hero who played an unsung role in bringing down one of the deadliest traitors in modern US history, Gennady is a hero of the human spirit, a flesh-and-blood spark that somehow manages to float through the air regardless of the climate. His loved ones got burned, but perhaps the notion of a pain-free existence is a uniquely American fantasy.
As of this writing, Cowboy’s ashes are with the Platt family, but Gennady is making plans to have a portion of them interred in a Northern Virginia cemetery—in the long shadow of the CIA—beneath a modest headstone paid for by the Shoffler Brunch crew. Gennady has made clear his wish to be buried beside Jack someday.
Gennady keeps Jack’s cowboy hat on a shelf in his home garage in the Virginia countryside, a modest hike to the banks of the Shenandoah River. One day, the spring after Jack died, Gennady awoke to unfamiliar sounds coming from the garage. His heart skipped. One last Sasha trick? He walked in and found that a healthy-looking bird had overturned the hat and made a nest for her family inside the crown. As a chick warbled along the brim, Gennady sighed with relief and savored this dividend of freedom. The ex-KGB officer, whose temperament seesawed between casual indifference and deep Russian sentimentality, then became drawn toward the call of another creature echoing in the valley outside. When Gennady opened his garage door and stepped into the morning sun, a lone eagle glided above the gentle slope that runs westward downhill to his gun range and onto the Shenandoah. 
