Chapter 17 - The Reset Red Button

You were sent to USA for long-term service trip. Your education, bank accounts, car, house, etc.—all these serve one goal: fulfill your main mission, i.e., to search and develop ties in policymaking circles in US and send intelligence reports to the Center.
 —Encrypted message sent to the Illegals from the Yasenevo Center in 2009 (translated and decrypted by the FBI)

On March 6, 2009, in Geneva, US secretary of state Hillary Clinton presented a smiling Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov with a small yellow plastic box topped with a red button embossed with the English word “reset.”* After ceremonially pressing the button, Lavrov accepted the gift, aimed at announcing a reset of the traditionally stormy US-Russian relationship.† Four months later, Russian Federation president Dmitry Medvedev, hopeful that the West would invite Russia into the World Trade Organization, and perhaps even NATO, announced that US armed forces supplies could pass through Russian airspace on their way to Afghanistan. Two months after that, President Barack Obama stated that the United States would drop its plan—long seen by the Russians as provocative—for a missile defense shield in Eastern Europe, as proposed by the previous (Bush) administration.
The reset continued apace for the next year: in March 2010, the two former Cold War adversaries reduced their nuclear arsenals; two months later, they agreed on sanctions against Iran; and three days after that, Obama canceled sanctions against the Russian state arms export agency, which the US had initiated in response to the Russians’ exporting arms to Iran.
The vibe flowed down through their respective intelligence services. CIA Director Leon Panetta wrote that he was in the midst of developing “a sound relationship” with his Russian counterpart, the Putin-appointed SVR chief Mikhail Fradkov. In his memoir, Worthy Fights, Panetta describes the “occasionally candid relationship” he developed with Fradkov, noting that Fradkov wanted “to share information and collaborate on some common operational activities.” Panetta had hoped “perhaps naively, that we could look for ways to cooperate [with the Russians] in areas such as Chechen terrorism, where we had common enemies.” All seemed right with the world. But some at the CIA weren’t buying it.
By this time, one of Jack’s former students in the IOC, Michael Sulick, had risen to the number-two post in the Agency, Deputy Director of Clandestine Services, otherwise known as the man who ran the nation’s spies. Like Jack, Sulick was old-school and suspected a Kremlin setup with the alleged “reset.” He knew Putin as a dyed-in-the-wool KGB man who wanted nothing less than to reconstitute the old USSR. As Panetta later wrote in his memoir, Sulick and those who shared his philosophy warned that “[t]he Russians would never share, and they’d use the whole thing to get close to our officers and try to recruit them as spies.” But Panetta thought differently, and the administration was already committed to the reset.
Internal objections aside, in 2009 Panetta hosted Fradkov at the CIA’s Langley headquarters. Afterward, they had dinner at the acclaimed Embassy Row organic eatery Restaurant Nora, where Fradkov uttered an unending series of incoherent Soviet-style platitudes that left both Panetta and his chief of staff Jeremy Bash dumbstruck. “What the hell was that?” Panetta asked Bash later as they walked to their cars. In 2010, Fradkov reciprocated as host, showing Panetta and Bash around the Center at Yasenevo. Panetta then met his FSB counterpart at Lubyanka, where Jeremy Bash whispered to him, “I think I can still hear the screams from the basement.” It was a reminder that the trip was taking place under extraordinary circumstances that only the Americans knew about. The Musketeers were also unaware of certain developments in the world of espionage and how they were fomenting a chain of events that would ideally lead to Gennady’s freedom.
What was going on? Just prior to his Russian excursion, Panetta had received intel that threatened to upend whatever diplomatic progress had been made up to this point: in the ongoing nine-year FBI surveillance of the Illegals, called Operation Ghost Stories, things were heating up. The FBI had been quietly watching the Russian plants since Aleksandr Nikolayevich Poteyev had given them up in 2001, and in the spring of 2010, the Bureau learned that some of the Russian spies were planning to return to the Motherland. FBI sources add that there was more to the heat-up, but those details are still secret. However, it is widely believed that Russian intelligence had ordered the Illegals to escalate their espionage activities—with special attention to various federal institutions, like the CIA and the State Department—before returning to Moscow. The change in operational status became a political conundrum: Should the US allow the Illegals to leave and share all their intel and inside knowledge with their bosses, or arrest them and derail the reset? 
Panetta briefed President Obama in February 2010 about the broad strokes of the Illegals story, triggering weeks of meetings at the White House about how to proceed. On June 11, Panetta again informed Obama and the National Security Council, convincing them that the arrests should be made and the reset would survive. Although the Obama administration worried that the much-hyped reset might be re-reset in the wake of the Illegals’ arrests, they hoped such a reversal might be averted by instantly proposing a swap, in place of a scandalous trial that would embarrass the president’s new best buddy, Medvedev, who would arrive in the US in a mere two weeks. The arrests had not been planned to facilitate a trade, but since the Bureau had concluded that the spies hadn’t yet caused serious injury to US security, it was determined that Washington, and the reset, could benefit more from using them for barter than as prisoners to be locked up for years. Obama and Panetta agreed to the plan. Fortunately, the FBI’s Alan Kohler, who had moved on from the Washington Field Office and was now chief of the Russia unit in the New York Field Office, had had a detailed swap contingency plan in the works as far back as 2004. Soon the Bureau and the CIA would learn whether the Russians would agree to the swap.
On June 24, after productive meetings on trade with US businessmen in California, Medvedev arrived in Washington and met with Obama.* “Russia belongs in the WTO,” Obama said as the two leaders stood side by side in the East Room, smiling after several hours of meetings. Obama then took Medvedev and Vice President Joe Biden for hamburgers at one of the president’s favorite burger joints, Ray’s Hell Burger. Later that day, before returning to Moscow, Medvedev traveled to Toronto for a G20 Summit, content with the results of his US diplomacy. Yet those living in the shadow world made moves that would have removed any and all smiles from the faces of the Russian contingent.
On the very same day that Obama and Medvedev grabbed the headlines, SVR colonel Aleksandr Poteyev, the man who had betrayed the Illegals nine years earlier, was quietly exfiltrated to the US and resettled with a new identity. Leaving his wife, Mary, behind, the fifty-eight-year-old Poteyev fled through his native Belarus and was placed under the protection of US intelligence agents.
“Mary, try to take this calmly: I am leaving not for a short time but forever,” Colonel Poteyev wrote in a text message sent to his wife as he fled Russia. “I did not want this but I had to. I am starting a new life. I shall try to help the children.” It is known that one daughter, Marina, lived in the US. It was later learned that Poteyev had used a stolen Russian passport and identity (“Victor Dudochkin”) to facilitate his travel to the US. The Russians located the real Victor Dudochkin, who explained that when he had previously applied for a US visa, he had turned over his passport to the US Embassy in Moscow while the visa was being processed. The Russians concluded that CIA agents stationed in the embassy had made a copy of Dudochkin’s passport and given the forgery to Poteyev for his escape. It is believed that Poteyev was paid as much as $5 million in return for his files.
On June 27, 2010, within minutes of Medvedev’s plane leaving Canadian airspace, and with Poteyev safely ensconced in the US, the FBI rounded up the Illegals. It was an anxious June 26 phone call, monitored by the FBI, between Illegal Anna Chapman and her KGB father that supposedly prompted such a quick seizure. In the call to Moscow, Chapman had voiced suspicions that she might have been “made.” An FBI plant inside the Illegals’ clique had requested a face-to-face meeting with Chapman earlier that day—it was something that was just never done; previously, all contact between Illegals and their controllers had been through encrypted private computer networks only. Gennady says the consensus today is that the Illegals should have known much earlier that they were being watched. “They were enjoying life in US too much and had lost their vigilance,” he explains.

In the New York area, where many of the Illegals lived, the FBI’s Alan Kohler helped coordinate the roundups. “The arrests were uneventful,” Kohler recently said. “They knew their time was coming.” Kohler added that the arrestees’ only seeming concern was the welfare of their children, who had no idea that their “American” parents were even Russian, let alone Russian spies. But thanks to years of planning, the Bureau descended on the scene fully equipped with a battery of social workers and child therapists, who assured both parents and children that they would be together very soon.
The Bureau alerted the press, and the operation instantly became front-page news around the world, with the arrestees named:

  • “Richard and Cynthia Murphy,” real names Vladimir and Lidiya Guryev 
  • “Michael Zottoli” and “Patricia Mills,” real names Mikhail Kutsik and Natalia Pereverzeva
  • “Donald Howard Heathfield” and “Tracey Lee Ann Foley,” real names Andrey Bezrukov and Elena Vavilova
  • “Juan Lazaro,” real name Mikhail Vasenkov, and Vicky Pelaez (her real name) 
  • “Anna Chapman,” real name Anna Kushchenko (or “Irene Kutsov”) and Mikhail Semenko (his real name)

But whom to swap for? After researching their SE files, the Agency could come up with only three apposite assets held by the Russians:

  • Aleksandr Zaporozhsky—Gennady’s friend since 1975, the former colonel in the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) had been charged with treason and sentenced in a secret 2003 trial to eighteen years of hard labor for espionage on behalf of the United States. Author Ronald Kessler wrote that, according to the Russians and a number of highly placed US intelligence sources, Zaporozhsky was indeed the man called AVENGER, the asset who had given Sandy Grimes’s team the final piece of the Ames puzzle back in 1993, the piece that convinced the FBI to make the Ames collar. As noted, upon retirement in 1997, Zaporozhsky/AVENGER moved to the United States, where he was suspected to have shared more classified information with Western intelligence agencies. But Zaporozhsky was arrested upon returning to Russia in 2001 and was convicted in 2003.
  • Igor Sutyagin—a forty-five-year-old arms researcher convicted of spying for the United States, sentenced to fifteen years in 2005. He had told relatives that he was loath to leave his homeland, but the deplorable Russian prison conditions and the possibility that he would prevent the release of others left him no choice but to go along with the swap.
  • Sergei Skripal—a former colonel in Russian military intelligence who was found guilty of passing state secrets to Britain and sentenced to thirteen years in prison in 2006.

Mike Sulick says that there was a desire to even up the exchange a bit more, so the Agency pondered who else might be added to the US list. “We had ten of theirs. They really didn’t have any of ours to swap for, but we wanted to balance out the trade,” he recalls. “I suggested to Panetta that Gennady be placed on the swap list. I felt that [the] CIA bore some responsibility for his situation. It was a leaked CIA memo that was misinterpreted that put him under suspicion in the first place.” When asked if Cowboy Jack had any input into this addition, Sulick replied, “This was a ‘close hold’ negotiation. Jack had no idea.”
Relying on their “sound relationship,” Panetta, surrounded by Sulick, Counterintelligence chief Lucinda “Cindy” Webb, and other Russia experts, placed a speakerphone call to Fradkov, which Panetta recounted in his memoir:
“Mikhail, we have arrested a number of people, as you saw in the press. Those people are yours.”
“Yes, they are my people,” Fradkov replied after a long pause. With just that utterance, Fradkov had made it possible to begin negotiations.
“We’re going to prosecute them,” Panetta threatened. “If we have to go through with trials, it is going to be very embarrassing for you.”
After another long pause, caused in part by distance and translation delays, Fradkov asked, “What do you have in mind?”
“You have three or four people that I want. I propose a trade,” Panetta offered. The Russians considered the swap idea for two days and then agreed to negotiate. According to one officer who was very close to Panetta, when Panetta suggested adding Gennady to the list, Fradkov, likely in a nod to Gennady’s free-spirited lack of discipline, replied, “Be careful what you ask for.”*

Over the next few days, Obama and Medvedev waited as their intelligence executives expedited an agreement, with Russia demanding signed confessions from their prisoners as a prerequisite to pardons from Medvedev. In the US, court appearances and similar plea deals were hastily arranged for the Illegals. The US required that no retaliatory steps be taken against Americans in Russia, that the Illegals agree never to return to the United States without permission from the attorney general, and that any money made from publication of their stories would be forfeited to the US Treasury. The Illegals who owned property, including real estate, further agreed to forfeit those assets to the US.
Panetta and Fradkov sealed the deal on July 3. Three calls over the course of one week.

As these prisoner exchange details were being finalized in the last week of June 2010, Gennady was incarcerated in prison 1K-11, in the Nizhny Novgorod region. He had heard about the arrest of the ten Illegals but had no idea that he was part of any swap. On the Fourth of July, Gennady celebrated the US holiday alone with a strong cup of Russian chifir’ tea (aka, prison tea) that he raised to silently toast his friend Cowboy Jack, who he knew was working on his behalf. It was his fifth year served of a three-year sentence.
The next day began normally with a 6 a.m. rise, followed by exercises, breakfast, and a return to the barracks until noon volleyball. Gennady’s prison diary best describes what occurred next:*

At about 1 o’clock, while on the volleyball court, I was given the order to pack my stuff within fifteen minutes and be ready for a transfer. It was a shock for me—I didn’t expect any transfers, and besides, transfers happened once a week on a certain day, but not on this day and not this time of a day. I was told by the administration that it was unexpected even for them. Now I was nervous.
So I packed my stuff, was put through the traditional humiliating strip-search, and was put in the prison’s truck for the trip—to where, I had no idea. In about an hour and a half the truck entered the N. Novgorod prison, where I had spent more than a year, so I recognized it. I thought that I was brought over there for another round of interrogations, or for the court to consider one of my complaints. But I wasn’t moved into the prison. Instead I was told to move immediately to another car with all my things. In the prison yard, I noticed a lot of authority figures, and some of them were even taking pictures of me. It was strange and unusual.
The car I was put in was not standard for moving prisoners, it was brand new VW van, but unfortunately inside the van was a freshly painted, small cage made of solid steel. It was like a gas chamber, especially if you take into consideration that outside it was about 85 degrees and of course we had no air conditioning. I thought that I might be taken to the railroad station to be put on train for still another destination.
I was wrong. I knew that the travel time from the prison to the railway station took not more than thirty minutes, but we had already been traveling more than forty minutes. Perhaps the destination was Moscow? I hoped I would survive the heat. After about an hour inside this moving gas chamber with little oxygen I started melting and panting. I started making noise and complaining, asking to open the door or stop for fresh air. The guards told me that they were in the same situation and they were not allowed to stop. Besides that, they were receiving calls with orders to reach the destination as soon as possible. I told them if they have to deliver my dead body, it’s OK, but if they have to bring me alive they have to give me a chance to get some fresh air. In about 30–40 minutes of bargaining the guards gave up and let me out of the car for a few minutes.
While outside, I noticed two more cars with guards, one car in front and one behind. The rest of the trip I survived easier, since it became cooler. At about 2 o’clock in the morning I found myself back in Lefortovo prison, a very familiar place for me.
For two hours I was put through the standard procedure: searches, fingerprinting, documentation, shower, and at 4 o’clock in the morning I was finally put in a cell. Of course I couldn’t sleep. I was trying to understand what could be the reason to bring me here again. I already knew about the arrest of the Illegals in New York and the only reason I was taken to Lefortovo, I guessed, was so that I could be a witness for the conviction of [Stepanov], whom I had helped to get a passport and visa to go to the US. I thought maybe he was involved also with helping identify the Illegals. That must be the reason I was spending a 6th year in prison on a three-year sentence.
At 9 o’clock, on the morning of July 6th, I was taken to the office of the chief of the prison. When I entered the room I saw five people, two on one side of the table and three on the other. Three of the men looked like foreigners, and I thought they might be from some international human rights committee that received my complaints about unjustified conviction and humiliating treatment in prisons (beatings, provocations, blackmailing, etc.). One of the Russian representatives was Aleksandr “Sasha” Zhomov, from the FSB—the thug who had interrogated me on my first week in Krasnya Presnya prison in Moscow.
One of the foreigners started speaking in Russian, introducing himself as the CIA Chief of Station, and the others were from Department of State and from the Justice Department. When I heard that one of the visitors, Dan [Payne, formerly of Sandy Grimes’s team], was the Chief of Station, I assumed that this is just another provocation, a ruse. I’d never read or heard of a CIA officer identifying himself, especially in front of an FSB representative. I was shocked, I even asked for their identifications. Then I realized that it was a stupid question: the FSB could make any kind of forged documents.
My conviction that it was a provocation became stronger after “Dan” read some items from “an agreement between the Russian and American governments,” according to which I have to sign a document admitting that I was working for the US government. I turned to Dan and told him that if he really represents the CIA, he should know that I never worked for any government besides the Russian one. Dan was trying to convince me that everything he told me was true, and not a provocation. It’s just the conditions of an agreement. If I would sign the document, I would be freed and flown to the US the next day.
My head was breaking apart. I didn’t know what to do. Dan told me that I had to make my decision immediately. My mind couldn’t comprehend the situation. I’m in prison and I am told I can spend the rest of my life there unless I confess and admit that I’m a CIA spy… and the next second, somebody else is trying to convince me to sign a paper admitting that I’m a spy, but promising me freedom and life in US. And the time for making the decision is just a few seconds. Was this an elaborate FSB trick to make me confess in advance of my execution?
Dan told me one more time that everything was real—it’s not a dream, and not a provocation. I had just to sign the document admitting that I was working for the US government, which I hadn’t. I thought, I had nothing to lose, but if everything is really true, I will be free in a day. I decided I would sign the document and so told the officials. I don’t remember how I ended up back in the cell. It was such a hurricane in my head. I regained consciousness when the guard knocked at the door and gave me a document to sign. It was an appeal to the president for a pardon. It meant I had to lie to the whole world, to my family and friends, telling that I’m a spy. The FSB was covering their ass with my name. It took me 3–4 hours before I signed the document and gave it to the authorities. That night passed without sleep. I was “running” in the cell like a crazy man. My thoughts were about the situation, kids, mother, my future life…
On the morning of July 7th the authorities informed me that I would be allowed to see some of my family, so I asked them to invite my son Ilya and Masha with the kids. The day passed in slow motion. I was too excited by the events—the possibility of freedom, transferring to US, seeing my kids that I hadn’t seen for four years. I was like a wounded animal in the cage.
In the evening, about 7 o’clock, I saw Vanya [Ivan] and Masha. It’s hard to find the proper words to express my feelings. I was in heaven. Vanya had grown up and looked like a man, smart and wise. When I told them that I will be released tomorrow and will be taken to America, they thought that I’d lost my mind, that I’m crazy. I was trying to explain the situation, but they couldn’t believe it. I told them that they have to be ready to join me in the States and stay with me for good. For them it was a bomb, even harder to understand the situation than for me, and I realized it. Everything was like a fairytale. Later they told me that when discussing our meeting on the way home, they came to the conclusion that I had lost my mind and that’s the reason the authorities arranged the meeting.
After the meeting with Masha and Vanya was over, I waited for the meeting with Ilya, but an authority told me that he would not come and he didn’t explain the reason. For me it was another blow I couldn’t understand. He was the only person with whom I wanted to discuss the situation and all the nuances for the future. I needed him badly. His disappearance tortured me until I had a chance to call him from the States a week later. Only then did I find out the reason he couldn’t come to see me because his mother-in-law had died the same day.
Of course I didn’t sleep the night. I was trying to find the answers to too many questions—first of all why I was put in the list for the swap??? What’s going to happened in the future with my mother, my kids, my wife, etc. Did I make the right decision to sign the papers? How I’m going to live in exile?
It so happened that the 8th of July was a holiday, “The Day of the Family.” What a happy coincidence. I was going to be free today. It was too much, I still couldn’t realize what was going on, and everything was not real, like a dream, a miracle… Today I’m going to be free and go to bed in America as a free man…
At about 10 o’clock I was escorted out of the cell to the reception room where already my bags were. I was allowed to put on my own clothes from what I had in my bag. It was my first step to the freedom and I was ready to make it, despite of heavy worries inside of me.
I make a coffee, packed 2 bags, one with documents and another with some personal staff. With impatience, I was waiting for the trip to the freedom. There were the most exiting hours. The time was passing, but no movement. I was still in prison. At 2 o’clock I was offered the lunch, but I couldn’t eat, no appetite. I was shivering like in the cold. Each hour was like eternity… This situation continues till 6 o’clock. I started thinking that everything was a set up, it was a play, but I couldn’t guess the aim of it. Only after 6 o’clock, I was told by an authority that there will be no action today; the flight had been postponed till next day, 9th of July. I was ordered to change my clothes back to the prison uniform and escorted back to the cell. Again I started thinking that everything was a game to kill me psychologically. All my dreams began vanishing, I was in frustration and depressed. In spite that I get used to a lot of different provocations in prison, this one wounded me badly; I even had to ask the authority for some medicine. It was another sleepless night, the 3d one in a row. I tried to put myself together, accepted the reality and just wait…

Unbeknownst to Gennady, a government-chartered Vision Airlines Boeing 767 jet had departed New York’s LaGuardia Airport en route to Vienna. On that plane, a team of State Department officials, CIA officers, and FBI agents were escorting the ten Illegals to Vienna for the swap. The keys to Gennady’s freedom, and likely his very life, were on their way without his knowledge. Alan Kohler, from the New York Field Office, led the Bureau’s escort team. As Kohler recently described, the FBI agents sat in first class while CIA officers spoke quietly with the Illegals and their Russian minders in coach, surrounded eerily by hundreds of empty seats.
On the long flight, Kohler, who occasionally went back to the coach section, observed the curious dynamic. “It was like two opposing football teams,” Kohler says. “The Americans versus the Russians—and they respected each other after a brutal three-hour game. No recriminations. Just cordial conversations.” Kohler describes what appeared to be a strange sense of relief on the faces of the prisoners.
It was the first time most of the Illegals actually had met one another, so they introduced themselves. With eight hours to kill on the flight, they also read the news reports of their arrests, and one startled Russian spy exclaimed to Kohler, “Wow, you really had microphones in my house?”
Back in Russia, there was no sense of relief for Gennady, just apprehension. That morning, for good luck, he wore his YOU DON’T KNOW ME/WITNESS PROTECTION PROGRAM T-shirt—a gift from Cowboy.

Gennady’s prison diary describes the scene in Lefortovo: 

    9th of July, 2010, Lefortovo prison 
    At 4 o’clock in the morning I was escorted back to the reception room and was allowed to change the clothes 
    and make a coffee. Than I was given some papers to sign, which I did automatically and begin to believe that 
    something is going to happen soon, maybe what I was told 2 days ago is still real. At about 6 o’clock I noticed 
    some activity and in a few minutes I was told to take my bags and follow the guards. Soon I found myself in 
    the prison’s yard where I was ordered to sit in the standing van.

Before Gennady took a seat on the van’s floor, he hadn’t bothered to make eye contact with the other prisoners, a lesson he learned early in his ordeal. Eye contact tended to provoke unwanted hostilities, so he kept his head down. He sensed just a few others. After he sat, Gennady felt a presence behind him. And the presence had a voice. Alex Zaporozhsky said, “We’ve got to stop meeting like this!”

    After few minutes the column of 5–6 cars started to move out of prison’s yard. We had been under reinforced 
    security not free. I understand that the swap exchange is a very serious operation. I’d been looking through 
    the window hoping to see my home on the way to the Sheremetyevo airport, from where I thought the plane would 
    fly to US. But soon, I realize that we were going to Domodedovo airport. When we reach the airport another 
    group of special security forces join the column. All the cars came to the airfield. Then we had been given 
    some papers about our release to sign, but nobody gave them to us. After that one by one under heavy guards 
    we had been moved to the plane. I thought that we had been free...but I was wrong. We still had been surrounded 
    by strong security. General Zhomov, who started my interrogation on my first week after arrest, was on the plane too.

When the plane carrying the prisoners took flight late that morning from Domodedovo, one of the US reps, possibly Dan Payne, passed the information up the chain of command, and within seconds, Panetta and the others at Langley were aware of the operational status. Someone quickly decided that a certain CIA retiree also needed to be updated.
In her Virginia home, Jack’s daughter Michelle was awoken at 4 a.m. by “a friend on the inside,” who called to tell her that “someone named Vasilenko” was on the swap list. “Think it’s your Gennady?” the friend asked. Michelle immediately called her father, also asleep, in Brooklyn, where he was visiting his beloved ailing younger sister, Polly (she would die a year later, at age seventy-two, of ALS). Michelle told him that she thought Gennady might be on the swap list. Jack was excited but also skeptical. He said he’d call back if he was able to confirm the news.
Gennady’s diary continues:

    The walk from one plane to another went smoothly and quiet. We were going out of the plane and saw the group 
    on the opposite side of the swap going out of another plane, which parked nearby. So, the two groups changed planes.

As he walked the tarmac to the US plane, Gennady came eye-to-eye with his nemesis, Sasha Zhomov, for whom he had only three parting words: “Nice try, motherfucker.”
Gennady wrote:

    When I put my step on the ladder of American plane I’d felt the real freedom, no guards, no motherfucker Zhomov. 
    It’s hard to explain the real feelings of freedom after almost 6 years of imprisonment under a 3 years sentence...
    I was in heaven, feeling as if I was intoxicated… It was hard to believe that 3 days ago I was in a strong security 
    prison where I was told I would spend the rest of my life and now I’m in the plane which is taking me to freedom. Miracle...

“In Vienna it was a weird dynamic,” Kohler recalls. “The Illegals were happy to leave the plane, while the four Russians were happy to be getting on it. Within minutes, the four Russians [had] arrived. Like clockwork. Not sure if they saw each other passing by, but they might have. Gennady wore this ‘You Don’t Know Me’ T-shirt and stuck out. On the plane, doctors checked them out. They looked bad and smelled like they hadn’t had showered in a month. They spoke to CIA people who were assigned to talk to them.”
The entire swap operation, an homage to the reset’s improved cooperation, went off seamlessly; the Russian plane took off at 12:38 p.m., while the Vision Airlines charter, heading first to London, was right behind them, wheels up at 12:45.
Again from Gennady’s diary:

    The flight from Vienna was joyful, we talk and laugh a lot, and it was fun. We even drink some champagne. The plane made 
    another short stop in London where two guys from our group were taken by Great Britain authorities.

The plane landed at RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire, England, to drop off two of the exchanged Russian nationals, Igor Sutyagin and Sergei Skripal, then proceeded across the Atlantic to Washington’s Dulles International Airport, while the Russian jet returned to Moscow’s Domodedovo airport, where, after landing, the ten Illegals were kept away from local and international press. Gennady says his KGB contacts told him the reason for the isolation: “Putin wanted to arrest the Illegals when they got back—for ten years they did nothing but party.” After consideration, Putin thought better of it.
Back in New York, at approximately the same time that Gennady’s plane took off from Oxfordshire, Cowboy Jack’s Trailways Express was pulling away from Penn Station, bound for Great Falls, Virginia. For three decades, Jack had been chasing his Russian friend. Now it was Gennady’s turn to chase Jack, from thirty-seven thousand feet above. When Jack’s bus exited the Holland Tunnel, he glimpsed Lady Liberty and hoped it was a sign that his friend had finally achieved his own freedom.
In the air over Oxfordshire, in the plane that could seat more than three hundred, Gennady and Aleksandr could finally exhale. “Someone broke open a bottle of scotch,” Alan Kohler remembers. “It was very emotional.” The FBI man chatted casually with both of his charges, but one exchange has stayed with him. “The most meaningful discussion I had on the flight was with Gennady. After we gassed up in England, it was clear that he was beat. We folded back two armrests between the seats so he could lie down. He put his head up on his elbow and looked up at me and said, ‘This is the first time I’ve slept on something other than concrete in five years.’”
Somewhere on the New Jersey Turnpike, Jack was dozing also—but not for long. By midmorning, Jack had finally received the call from Panetta’s Deputy Director of Clandestine Services—and Jack’s old IOC trainee—Mike Sulick. “It was the first time in my twenty-six years that a Deputy Director of Operations ever called me,” Jack said in 2016.
“Hi, Jack. I’m here to tell you that your buddy is on the swap list,” Sulick said.
“Don’t kid me now. This is very serious.” 
“I wouldn’t kid about this,” Sulick assured him. “I know how much he means to you.”
Thinking that Gennady was still being processed in Russia, Jack knew his friend well enough to know that he’d worry that it was a ruse, another form of Sasha-style torture. “I told Sulick to assure Genya that this wasn’t a trick,” Jack said. “ ‘Have your guy tell him “Chris Llorenz” passes you his greetings.’”
Now, finally, Jack could almost confirm Michelle’s hopeful message. But he still repressed the urge to rejoice out loud on the Trailways Express; he worried that Sasha, Fradkov, and the totalitarian Putin apparatus were indeed playing another cruel trick on the West, and on Gennady. He couldn’t know that Kohler and others had personally escorted Gennady onto the plane. On the bus, Jack’s mobile phone kept ringing with congratulations from his former CIA colleagues, confirmations that finally put Jack’s concerns to rest. In Virginia, Michelle Platt was hanging by the phone, also waiting for the final validation: “Dad calls me back later that morning to say he’s on the bus home, and, yes, it is indeed time to celebrate.”
Sinking into his seat, Cowboy contemplated the cycles of life, trying to discern a pattern. He had just visited his sister and best friend, Polly, whom he knew he was losing. Next, he had learned that he was getting back his second best friend, Gennady. Was this how God worked, balancing things out, stealing one life and replacing it with another? No, Cowboy realized, that was just pathetic human logic trying to find a place for itself in a capricious world. Cowboy had always been more a man of values than of faith. He thought of President Kennedy’s words from his inaugural address, words that had echoed through his skull as he crouched off angry Cuban waters during the missile crisis: “With a good conscience our only sure reward, with history the final judge of our deeds, let us go forth to lead the land we love, asking his blessing and his help, but knowing that here on earth God’s work must truly be our own.” God’s work must truly be our own. Amen.
No, Cowboy reasoned, if God had played a role in Gennady’s release, it wouldn’t have been because he was seeking to even things out for this old spook. God had fallen seriously short on much bigger balancing acts in the world.

There were many poignant moments for Alan Kohler during the final few days, but the one that stood out occurred on that last Vision charter flight, about forty-five minutes from their Washington destination. “When we flew over New York and the Statue of Liberty came into view, we watched with Gennady as he looked at it through the window. He teared up.”
