Chapter 4: Musketeers

Will you still be here when I get out?

Since Gennady spent much more time on the volleyball and tennis courts than at the target range, Cowboy informed Lane Crocker that he would need a Bureau athlete to really schmooze this guy. Shortly thereafter, an agent from the criminal division, Gary Schwinn (a pseudonym chosen by the authors), was assigned to CI-4 and the new “Get Gennady” team. Cowboy introduced thirty-year-old Schwinn, a five-letter man in college (including tennis and volleyball), to the Russian as a tennis-loving “business friend.” In fact, Schwinn was also a weekend disco dance instructor (white Travolta suit included) who was called “Johnny Disco” by others on the Squad. Members of the Squad remember his go-to pickup line for female agents: “Do you Hustle?”
On the early evening of September 25, 1979, the flamboyant trio found themselves at the Gangplank Restaurant, where they met up with a CIA code clerk “Captain Dougie,” who owned a houseboat that was moored nearby at the capital’s only live-aboard marina. Walking toward Hains Point along the dock, Gennady’s eyes lit up when Cowboy pointed out in the distance the presidential yacht the Sequoia. “You mean where Kennedy did all his fucking?” Gennady inquired.
Inside the Gangplank, the four-dozen patrons at the crowded upper-deck restaurant had no idea that the increasingly rowdy quartet, which was downing copious amounts of beer and vodka, consisted of two CIA officers, an FBI agent, and a KGB spy. While Cowboy and Gennady were masters at holding their alcohol—Gennady was rumored to have a cast-iron liver—Gary and Captain Dougie were having a hard time remaining upright.
Suddenly, Gary attempted to rise and blurted out to two couples at the next table, “This here is real vodka, this here is a real KGB guy, those are real CIA guys, and I’m FBI!” Cowboy flushed with the instant realization that he could be out of a job if this continued—in fact, it might already have been too late to save it. He threw a hundred-dollar bill on the table and told Gary and Captain Dougie that they had to get out of there, now. That’s when Gennady and Cowboy discovered that the inebriated duo couldn’t walk.
Cowboy instructed Gennady, “You take Johnny Disco. I’ll take Dougie.” Cowboy and Gennady proceeded to carry them to Captain Dougie’s houseboat, but as the quartet stumbled down the docks, Cowboy lost his grip and the clerk fell into the channel—not the first or last Gangplank patron to do so. After Gennady retrieved Captain Dougie, Cowboy thought, Isn’t this just spectacular? A CIA officer and KGB spy carrying an FBI agent and a sopping wet Agency code clerk to a houseboat. When Gary came to hours later, Cowboy let him have it: “You got drunk and had a fuckin’ KGB officer carry you to the boat. Don’t let it happen again. We have a case to work here.”
The looming problem for Cowboy was a stroke of splendidly awful luck: the two couples seated at the next table had been Air Force Intelligence colonels and their wives, and the next day they reported the incident to the Air Force Office of Special Investigations (AFOSI), which passed them over to the FBI, where they were referred to Cowboy’s friend John “Mad Dog” Denton in the CI-4 office. Before joining the Bureau in 1969, New Jersey native Denton had, like Cowboy, served in the Marines, where his practical jokes and good-natured irreverence earned him the “Mad Dog” moniker. Among his stunts was scaling the Marine base’s fence late at night as if he were an intruder and whispering faux-foreign gibberish, throwing the sentries into a panic. Mad Dog’s Marine moniker followed him into his FBI work, say fellow CI-4 members. Once he ripped out the wires of a police car radio because the siren drove him nuts. Mad Dog and Cowboy’s shared “leatherneck” history and iconoclastic behavior forged a strong bond between the two counterintelligence partners. “I had met Jack at social gatherings,” Denton says. “He was not only a fellow jarhead but a real nutjob.”
The colonels who had witnessed the Gangplank fiasco described the supposed “CIA guy” as oddly wearing one glove on his left hand—a peculiarity that applied to only one known Agency employee: Cowboy Jack Platt. At CI-4 headquarters, a furious Lane Crocker instructed Mad Dog Denton to “see if [Gennady’s recruitment] is salvageable.” If that turned out to be the case, Denton would partner with Jack. “I was looking forward to working with him,” Denton says.
Mike Rochford couldn’t have picked a more bizarre occasion for his first day on the job with the CI-4 Squad. The twenty-four-year-old Southern Illinois farm boy had just completed Russian language training at the Defense Language Institute and was now looking to introduce himself to his new boss. “I asked to see Lane Crocker,” recalls Rochford, “and I was told he was busy trying to save some CIA’s officer’s career.” In his office, Lane was in fact on the phone to CIA headquarters and Cowboy Jack at the CIA Washington Station in Bethesda.
“Lane told me I was in trouble at headquarters,” Cowboy remembered, “so I went right over to see Hav Smith and begged for my career.” Smith said he’d see what he could do but made no promises. Cowboy twisted in the wind for a week until the final word came. “The indelible date for me was October 8, 1979, when Hav told me I was about to be fired,” Cowboy said. “Hav reminded me that Nixon had years earlier passed a decree that any CIA officer who refused treatment for alcoholism or drugs had to be fired. I was crying by this time.”
According to one colleague, the Gangplank event was not the only infraction on Jack’s card; in his zeal to “accomplish the mission,” Jack had taken his work home, work that included classified documents. Thus he was already hanging by a thread when the marina incident occurred. His Williams College friend Carl Vogt, by now living in DC and a partner in Leon Jaworski’s law firm, remembers a distraught Jack calling him the next day, saying, “I need to talk to someone.” Jack told Carl that he had been given an ultimatum to get help immediately. “The penalty is I’ll never get promoted,” Jack said. “The good news is I don’t get fired.”
It wasn’t just the CIA that was fed up with Jack; someone with far greater influence over him—his wife, Paige—had been quietly making plans to leave him. She had found full-time work and was making her own money, a core element of her exit strategy. Then, out of nowhere, Jack called Paige from work and said he needed to meet her for lunch, something he never did. As soon as Paige sat down, Jack said, “I have something to tell you: I’m an alcoholic and I’m going into rehab tomorrow morning. Will you still be here when I get out?” Paige was stunned. She had been making progress on finding a divorce attorney and now this. She doesn’t remember exactly how she answered Jack other than having conveyed her skepticism that he could beat this curse. Perhaps she didn’t want to commit to an assurance. Nevertheless, she stayed.
Both Jack’s Agency supervisors and his wife had been correct about his problem, and he now knew it. Although he had held it together at the Gangplank, the fact was that in recent months he had been having regular blackouts. “You know you’re an alcoholic when you start having blackouts,” he said. “I became a ceiling-ologist. Drunks often wake up looking at the ceiling, trying to remember where they are.”
Jack jumped at the chance to save his career—and his deteriorating marriage—and right after hanging up with Carl, he checked into a medical facility at the CIA’s secret training center, The Farm, near Williamsburg, Virginia, where he spent twenty-eight days going cold turkey before attending Alcoholics Anonymous for the rest of his life. “Recovery is one day at a time. AA is wonderful.” From that day on, Jack’s go-to drink was near beer.
Once Jack had recovered and had become more forthcoming about his struggles, his daughter Leigh asked him if, in all his adventures, he had ever had an affair. Her father answered, “Yes, I had an affair. With a bottle.” But never with another woman. “Dad was in a business where you work hard but get no affirmation. Dad didn’t need affirmation; he just needed my mom.”
While Jack was in treatment, the Bureau and the CIA shut down the “Get Gennady” operation, and Gary Schwinn received the ultimate FBI chastisement: a transfer. While Schwinn packed his bags for the Bureau’s version of Siberia (Detroit), Mad Dog Denton further investigated the Gangplank incident, interviewing not only the witnesses but also Gary’s and Gennady’s volleyball pals in order to determine how badly CI-4 had been compromised.*
While Denton worked on the Gangplank damage assessment, FBI rookie Mike Rochford spent his first month at Buzzard Point in frustration. He had been tasked with compiling material on one of Gennady’s rezidentura colleagues, the idea being, as always, to determine if a pitch was possible. However, the CIA’s SE Division had balked at sharing its KGB files with the Bureau. That difficulty was about to be remedied.
“I’m sitting at my desk when I see this guy dressed in cowboy gear coming into the office,” remembers Rochford. “He throws a thick stack of paper on my desk and says, ‘I heard you wanted these. Well, they just fell off a truck.’”
“‘Who are you?’ I asked him,” Rochford recalls. “That was the first time I met Jack Platt.”
It was Cowboy’s first day back on the job after drying out at The Farm. A week later, Mike Rochford was assigned to share his government car with none other than Cowboy and Mad Dog, chauffeuring them around town. Rochford was, however, not deemed ready to associate with their main target, Gennady.
Soon Denton concluded that the Gennady case was indeed salvageable, but supervisor Lane Crocker nevertheless decided to put the project on ice for the time being. However, Mad Dog’s Gangplank investigation yielded unforeseen benefits regarding the Russian’s local contacts, information that would change Crocker’s mind and culminate in a major overture to Gennady. One of Gennady’s closest friends, Denton learned, was a colorful Ukrainian-born radio engineer named George Powstenko, who was clearly the Russian Cowboy’s “uncle”/confidant. Powstenko had been a US citizen for two decades, but “George looked like a Cossack, with his moustache and ushanka hats,” recalls Denton. “He was a stereotypical Eastern Bloc character—everything revolves around drinking together.”
Powstenko, whose company—Smith and Powstenko—serviced radio and TV transmission needs, was a force of nature in his own right and could be found most mornings at Blackie’s House of Beef, already sipping on B and B (brandy and Benedictine). Having immigrated to the US in 1949 after the USSR absorbed the Ukraine, Powstenko had become one of the leading voices of the millions of fellow Ukrainians living in US exile.* He had originally connected with Gennady through the men’s volleyball team he founded, Chaika, which included amateurs from many government agencies and was called “Washington’s Yankees” by local players. When George and Gennady weren’t chasing errant volleyballs, they indulged in their other mutual passion: chasing skirts. (Unbeknownst to George, Yakushkin had ordered Gennady to keep an eye on the Cossack engineer also.)
After one of his three-martini working lunches with Powstenko, Mad Dog Denton was witnessed under his Washington Field Office desk, feet sticking out for his fellows to trip over, while warbling “The Star-Spangled Banner” at full volume. When he was first asked to become a source for the Squad, Powstenko replied tersely, “I won’t help the FBI—it is a fucked up organization.” To which Mad Dog answered, “You’re absolutely correct.” Powstenko, obviously appreciating Denton’s candor, then turned on a dime. “Okay, I’ll help you.”
Powstenko said he was happy to discuss any KGB business he picked up in the local Russian community so long as his friend Gennady was untouched. Cowboy and Mad Dog agreed, but Cowboy still believed he needed to recruit an athlete to get even closer to Gennady, and he hoped Powstenko would point him in the right direction. More often than not, Powstenko had salacious Gennady tales to relate, including the time Powstenko was walking down 16th Street and pulled Gennady out of a car, where he had been screwing the eighteen-year-old niece of a high-ranking member of Jimmy Carter’s administration.
While waiting for a good lead from the Ukrainian, Cowboy and Mad Dog continued socializing with Gennady, taking the Russian, who openly defied Yakushkin, for all sorts of get-togethers: lunches, family dinners, shooting and fishing excursions. “We often went camping in Fredericksburg, Virginia, near where the Rappahannock River meets the Rapidan,” remembers Denton. “It was all shooting, fishing, and practical jokes. We were like three overgrown kids.” One night, the trio was out shooting in the woods when they walked into a clearing and came upon concerned campers with flashlights. The FBI men flashed their badges and explained to the citizens that they were on a top-secret government mission to neutralize space aliens who had been caught creeping through the forest. “We got ’em all,” the Feds explained to the anxious campers.
Eventually, Powstenko delivered the goods, telling Cowboy and Mad Dog about Tom Welch, an Arlington-based regional executive with IBM and a top-flight volleyball player-coach. Powstenko told the pair that Welch was coincidentally just now forming his own six-man AAU volleyball team in Virginia and was, like Gennady, a thirty-seven-year-old bachelor—Gennady in spirit, at least. More importantly, Californian Welch liked girls and vodka.
By the spring of 1980, Cowboy and Mad Dog had convinced their respective bosses to restart what they formerly called “Operation Gennady” (now officially called DOVKA, an anagram of “vodka.”) Time was short, they told their superiors. Gennady had told the team that he was due to be rotated back to Moscow after his US posting expired in 1981. Cowboy and Mad Dog succeeded in convincing Lane Crocker at the WFO to back an entrée to Welch, officially making him part of the operation. It wasn’t long before Cowboy and Denton showed up at Welch’s IBM office in Arlington.
“One day my secretary came into my office with a concerned look on her face,” said Welch.
“There are two strange men who want to see you,” she said. 
“Who are they?” 
“They won’t say.” 
“Where are they from?” 
“They won’t say.” 
“That’s it?” 
“One of them is dressed like he’s with a rodeo.” 
“Hell, show them in.” 
On entering the office, Cowboy spoke up first. “Mr. Welch, would you mind if we closed your office door?”
Welch agreed while Mad Dog gave the secretary his best “Get lost” look. She closed the door behind her. According to Welch, Cowboy and Mad Dog made no pretense about where they worked, displaying their FBI and CIA credentials.
Again, Cowboy spoke up. “There’s a gentleman working at the Russian embassy, a fellow volleyball player named Gennady Vasilenko. We want you to play volleyball with him, take him out, have fun, anything you want. Basically, entertain Gennady and tell him why he should defect. We’ll set up a bank account for you to use with him.”
“So the CIA needs better volleyball players that bad?” Welch half joked, drawing no response from either Cowboy or Mad Dog. “I made it crystal clear to them that it’s not my job to recruit spies,” remembers Welch.
“Okay, then just party with him—on our tab,” Cowboy countered. “Let him know how great America is. We’ll do the rest.”
A bit of a carefree, adventurous type himself, Welch agreed—the idea of partying on the government’s dime, with no quid pro quo, was an offer he couldn’t refuse. Of course, the whole gambit would only go forward if he liked the Russian, Welch said.
“Don’t worry,” Cowboy said. “Everybody likes him.” 
Soon, an operational funds account of $5,000 ($14,000 in 2017 dollars) was set up for Welch with the Bank of Virginia. To put the plan into motion, Powstenko was contacted and told to suggest to the unsuspecting Gennady that he try out for Welch’s new team.
“I remember when Gennady first showed up at our practice,” Welch recalls. 
“I want to play for your team,” Gennady said in his thick Russian accent. 
“I already have a team,” answered Welch, feigning disinterest. 
“Just give me one set,” Gennady pleaded. 
At that point one of Welch’s players inserted himself. “What the hell? Let him play one set.” Welch relented and was glad he did.
“He was amazing—far better than the best player on our team,” Welch says. At a team meeting the next day, Welch took the temperature of his players regarding whether one of them minded being benched for a Russian former Olympian. “I don’t give a fuck,” said team captain Antonio. “Put him on the team.”
Over the next few months, Welch and Gennady partied on the government’s dime, attending fancy embassy parties and the best Georgetown bistros. Welch remembers he and Gennady often practicing two-man volleyball together, and drinking hard after. “Whenever he’d call me up for a practice, he’d always end by saying, ‘Tom, bring alcohol.’ Of course, Gennady always came well stocked anyway, with five-star Russian vodka. After just our second drink together, he told me that he was KGB and the vodka was part of his official allotment for recruiting.”
Welch harbored a vague sense that hanging out with a Russian spy might be dangerous in theory—an exploding fountain pen, perhaps—but he never imagined that the hazard would come in the form of anything as banal as Gennady’s driving. Late one night, Welch picked up Gennady and two other foreign volleyball players in his clunky old Mercedes for a road trip to a meet in North Carolina. As they crossed the state line after midnight, with Antonio and Juan sleeping in the back, Gennady’s frustration with the pace of things took root.
“Tom, you drive too slow,” he said. “I’ll drive now.” Once behind the wheel, Gennady hit the gas and sped the Mercedes to well over 100 miles per hour.
Tom grabbed the armrest and the window, shouting, “You’re going to kill us!” 
Gennady shrugged. “Don’t worry. I do this all the time.” 
Within minutes they were being chased by one of Carolina’s finest, all lit up and siren screaming. Gennady accelerated to about 140 miles per hour, the engine straining as the cop vanished in the rearview mirror. Gennady paid a compliment to German engineering and brought the car back to about 100.
A few miles later, the volleyballers came upon a constellation of whirring red lights and found themselves confronting twenty police cars blocking the highway. This got Gennady’s attention, and he hit the brakes. Tom instructed his foreign friends to pretend they couldn’t speak any English. The cops demanded that Gennady, Tom, Antonio, and Juan raise their hands above their heads and get out of the car. Tom pleaded with the officers, explaining that they couldn’t be arrested because they were embassy employees with diplomatic immunity. The threesome displayed their IDs. Tom told the disbelieving cops that they were on their way to a volleyball tournament. “Prove it.” He slowly popped open the Mercedes’s trunk to reveal four balls and about twelve bottles of Gennady’s best vodka.
Furious that the “diplomats” were beyond his reach for arrest, the lead cop gave Gennady a speeding ticket for going 140 in a 60 mile-per-hour zone. As the cops walked away, Gennady spoke out, now in perfect English: “Nice to see you, Officer—and fuck you!”
When the summer of 1980 rolled around, Welch was preparing a trip home to California to visit his parents and attend an Al Scates Summer Camp in La Jolla. A coach at UCLA since 1959, the legendary Scates had personally reinvented the way volleyball was played,* going on to have, in a fifty-year career, an 81 percent winning record, three undefeated seasons, and twelve national championship rings (two more than UCLA basketball legend John Wooden). His nineteen national titles are the second most of any college coach in any sport.
Welch had a passing acquaintance with Scates and phoned him at UCLA to see if he would like a former Russian Olympian to give a clinic or two at the camp. Scates said he’d be happy to have him. “I thought Southern California would be a great way for Gennady to experience the best of America,” Welch says. “Great weather, girls on the beach, the whole nine yards.” Of course, the notion rested on the assumption that Gennady could wrangle a sign-off from Yakushkin.
Cowboy and Mad Dog were immediately on board with the California idea and began making their own travel plans. The mission was to party hard with Gennady in California after Welch had handed him over. “The reason for the California trip,” says Denton, “was that it’s always important to get a potential recruit away from his controls. They have a terrifying hold on their officers.”
Gennady was ecstatic about the Welch invitation, as Al Scates was well known to him—as were California bikinis. Back at the embassy, Gennady approached Dmitri Yakushkin with his request to spend a week in Southern California. Although Gennady suggested to his boss that the trip might yield some recon intel on Southern California military bases, as well as the future US Olympic team, his actual, unstated goal was to check out those “California girls” he had heard so much about. When he informed a hesitant Yakushkin that all expenses were to be paid by Welch, the chief caved but sternly warned him that he had a seven-day pass, not one minute more.
Soon thereafter, Gennady met Cowboy at one of their regular haunts, bristling with excitement. “Guess what?” he said. “I’m playing volleyball in San Diego, California, in August.” To which a poker-faced Cowboy replied, “What a coincidence. I’ll be in LA at the same time for a conference. I’ll try to come down and see you.”
There was only one more piece of the puzzle that needed to fall into place before the trip: a critical addition to their merry band. With Gary Schwinn long gone and Mad Dog soon to be transferred to Knoxville, a new FBI CI-4 case officer was assigned to the Gennady DOVKA operation. Dion Rankin was chosen, according to Denton, because “Dion was the guy who was most like Gennady.” Some might call that an understatement.
Dion (pronounced “Dy-on”) was a thirty-four-year-old native of Augusta, Georgia, where his father bred walking horses (and sold one to their neighbor, soul icon James Brown). He was also a master tracker, having learned the skill in the wilds of Malaysia, where as an army first lieutenant he volunteered to study at the British Jungle Warfare School. After Malaysia and then Vietnam, Dion got his degree in psychology before joining the FBI in 1972. He achieved Bureau acclaim when he helped track James Earl Ray, the assassin of Martin Luther King Jr., after his 1977 escape from Brushy Mountain State Penitentiary in Tennessee. He also provided key tracking assistance during the 1975 Pine Ridge incident in which two FBI agents had been murdered by Indian activist Leonard Peltier, still on the run when Dion arrived on the scene. Known among his colleagues as a man who didn’t suffer fools, Dion had worked in seven different FBI field offices as an interrogator, polygrapher, and firearms instructor before joining CI-4 in 1977, where he had been involved in the successful roll-up of CIA turncoat David Henry Barnett in 1979. In that investigation, Dion and his colleagues had obtained the key evidence from Vladimir Piguzov, the same man who had helped Cowboy gather background on Gennady. Dion had met Cowboy in 1978 at a mutual friend’s party. “He had a good line of bullshit,” remembers Dion. “He had a foul mouth, but endearing.”
Operation DOVKA now officially included the acknowledged cowboys from their respective agencies—the CIA, FBI, and KGB—although Cowboy, Dion, and Gennady preferred to call themselves the Three Musketeers (and even had matching shirts made to that effect). Mad Dog, soon to be transferred, was an “honorary” Musketeer. Driver Rochford soaked up their collective “spook wisdom” like a sponge. “All these type A personalities together,” recalls Rochford. “How they all got along was fuckin’ beyond me.”
Rochford bonded with all the men but grew to love the externally gruff Marine Cowboy Jack. “The first time I met Jack’s family told me a lot about him,” says Rochford. “It was a Christmas party at his house. Jack noticed that my three-year-old, Megan, was all alone, shy. He sat beside her and held her hand, takes her over to the tree. ‘Anything there you like?’ Jack asked her. Megan pointed to a stuffed bear as big as she was. Jack grabbed it and gave it to her: ‘Merry Christmas.’ It was his daughter Michelle’s bear. Megan has it to this day, thirty-eight years later.”
The California trip, Mad Dog’s last CI-4 assignment before his transfer, was perceived by Crocker—and especially Jack’s current SE boss Dave Forden—as a pitch operation. The Musketeers promised their superiors they would put recruitment, or at least defection, on the table in San Diego.
Gennady and Welch took a red-eye flight in order to have a full day available when they got off the plane. On the first day, after checking into a hotel in Santa Monica, the duo headed straight for the beach and took on its local two-man volleyball hotshots. Gennady crushed them. “He told me, ‘Move over,’” says Welch. “He took over ninety percent of the sand court and destroyed the locals almost single-handedly.” That night, Welch threw a welcome party for Gennady—courtesy of the FBI—at a swank Beverly Hills restaurant with about fifty attendees.
Meanwhile, on their plane to San Diego with Mad Dog, Dion and Cowboy strategized about just when and how they were going to pitch Gennady. The Musketeers quickly agreed to defy their marching orders. “Fuck Forden,” Cowboy said. “Let’s just do it like the Russians—take your time, be patient.” One of the many things that bonded Cowboy and Dion was their shared impunity regarding rules from above.
“We both concluded that it was easier to ask forgiveness later than to ask for permission in advance,” Dion recalls. Thus the only plan they hatched was to introduce Gennady to Dion and Mad Dog, and do everything possible to create a lasting bond, all the while showing Gennady how much fun he could have in the US of A.
Mike Rochford summarizes what was happening between the team and their target, Gennady: “It had nothing to do with recruitment. We didn’t care if he got recruited. It was simply that access meant opportunity. The Russians have a word for it: blat. It means ‘favors through networking,’ the magic of relationships. Bureaucrats push for recruitment, like it’s a quota thing. But that’s stupid. It’s about trust, friendship, and patience.”
Jack agreed, adding, “I knew he loved his country, but perhaps he didn’t love his government.” With that calculus, it was decided that recruitment was unlikely, but perhaps Gennady would one day relocate to the US and help in ways yet unforeseen.
The Musketeers checked into the high-end Hotel del Coronado on San Diego Bay. Regarding the first-class accommodations, Dion explains, “This operation was a high priority for the Squad. They spared no expense.” No sooner had Jack thrown his suitcase on his room bed than he called Gennady at his Santa Monica hotel and set up a get-together for the next day—no time to waste since Gennady had only a seven-day pass. Jack next called Welch and arranged a tête-à-tête for later that day, with Jack and Mad Dog making the drive north.
Welch took Gennady back to the beach, where he rightly assumed he would become engaged with a bikini or two, affording Welch the opportunity to sneak away to meet Jack and Mad Dog at the well-known Santa Monica burger joint Father’s Office. “Jack wanted to know how it was going,” says Welch. “I told him that Gennady was having a blast.” The trio made plans for the handoff in La Jolla after Gennady gave his clinic at the camp.
Driving south to La Jolla the next day, Gennady told Welch that a friend had called and that they were going shooting together after the camp broke. Welch feigned surprise; at this point Gennady wasn’t aware that Jack even knew Welch. On the way to the camp, there was a massive Marine amphibious exercise on the beaches and just offshore at Camp Pendleton. “Gennady yelled, ‘Stop the car! Stop the car!’” For the next ninety minutes, he photographed the exercise from a promontory for his boss, Yakushkin, his California getaway now justified.
Back in the car, Gennady sought to reassure Welch. 
“Tom, you’re a good man,” he said. “No worries. America is a great place. You don’t have to worry about Russians. Worry about Chinese.”
At Scates’s camp, Gennady found himself in volleyball heaven, giving a clinic and scrimmaging with future Olympic legends Sinjin Smith and Karch Kiraly, who were working as assistants to Scates. After the clinic, Cowboy showed up, and Tom handed Gennady off before driving back to LA. “And these guys have the most amazing toys!” Cowboy said, contorting and shaking his arms to mimic an automatic weapon. “Puh-puh-puh-puh-puh-puh-puh.” Gennady’s eyes lit up. He was in; the combination of a guilt-free conscience and the chance to hang with American gunslingers was sheer bliss.
The next morning, Cowboy, Dion and Mad Dog climbed into a Bureau sedan and set out from their hotel north on I-5 to the UCSD dorms in La Jolla. Denton remembers that Cowboy, mindful of his recruitment scheme, was so anxious to see his pal again that he rushed out without his one black glove. Halfway to La Jolla they had to turn around and retrieve it. “The glove never made any sense to me,” observes Mad Dog. “It was just as good an identifier as the missing finger. Go figure.” Still using his “Chris” cover, Cowboy introduced Dion and Mad Dog as the FBI agents they were. “The fewer lies the better,” Cowboy said.
“Gennady was guarded and a little nervous on meeting us,” says Dion. “But we loosened him up real quick.” That night the foursome wined and dined at a swanky oceanside Mexican restaurant, where Dion concluded that “it is impossible to get Gennady drunk.”
The two new FBI guys on the case soon realized why Gennady had been seen as a possible recruit. According to Denton, “He was different from most Russians—Western tastes and a sense of humor. Cowboy called him ‘the KGB’s oldest teenager.’” He loved Western clothes, guns, and especially Western women. But unlike clothes and women, guns were all but prohibited in the USSR. Denton made a call to the San Diego Field Office to see what armaments he could line up for the KGB spy, a request he was certain he had never made before.
Soon the Musketeers were driving back down to the Coronado, where a Bureau Chevy Blazer had been left for them, and off they drove into the desert toward the Escondido Police range. Mad Dog remembers, “On the shooting range, we laid guns out on a table like a smorgasbord for Gennady. His eyes were the size of baseballs.” Dion also noticed the first sign of unease from the Russian. “He seemed a little nervous to be around all these armed FBI guys,” Dion says. “He calmed down when we all started obliterating the targets. It broke the ice.”
After blowing the targets to smithereens with some of the highest-powered weaponry at the Bureau’s disposal, the guys piled back into the Blazer and attacked the desert sand dunes with childlike abandon. Cowboy took a photo of Gennady wearing Mad Dog’s FBI badge. They sensed that the Russian felt totally free for the first time in his life.
Denton recalls that the craziness subsided the next day, when Cowboy asked to be driven to the City Heights area of San Diego, known to locals as Little Cambodia. “I’ve got to go see some people,” Cowboy said. He had an address that took them to a two-story apartment complex that held perhaps twenty units. “It was full of Cambodians and Laotians that Jack had helped relocate after the war,” Mad Dog Denton says. “The entire complex emptied and rushed out to hug him. It was Christ-like, or like a scene out of the movie Lord Jim.”*
Later that day, all four Musketeers met up with a retired local FBI agent who owned a deep-sea fishing boat. While on the excursion, Dion did a little bit of his own human reeling in. He purposely sat by himself on the bow, hoping that Gennady might get curious. “Twenty-five miles out to sea, Gennady approaches me on the front of the boat—he wants to talk,” Dion says. “He was nervous. He just wanted to get to know me, feel me out. ‘Where are we going with this?’ he asked. Just fun, no business, I told him. So we just talked about family.” It was the beginning of a lifelong friendship.
As the sun beat down on their scalps, Jack appeared at the front of the boat and chimed in. “Look, Gennady, this has been a great trip, and it was a great trip because we weren’t screwing around with the mission. My view: there shouldn’t be a mission anymore, at least not with each other. The truth is, I’m CIA and you’re KGB. I still think you would be happy in America, but if you don’t know that by now, it’s not a car I can sell you.” Jack’s statement wasn’t pure virtuousness; one of the cardinal rules of tradecraft was “Don’t harass the opposition,” at least not to the point where you might chase away a target. If Gennady would come over to the American side, it would be evolutionary, not via tactical intervention.
Gennady agreed. “Let’s have a good relationship. Let’s forget about the task. That is the agreement. That is our deal.”
The deal was their friendship. More than three decades later, Jack and Gennady still referred to this trip as “the dealmaker.” They then turned their attention back to detonating marine life. They were having such a blast, literally, that they lost track of time while they were alternatively fishing and trying to blow up anything in the water that moved with firepower from the deck. Suddenly, Gennady realized he had to get to LAX. His boss had been explicit about his getting back to the rezidentura on time. At full throttle, they steamed the yacht back to the harbor. The four men climbed into Mad Dog’s FBI car and headed up the coast to Los Angeles.
“On the way to LAX,” Denton recalls, “I thought we were lost, so I pulled up alongside a Cheech Marin hippie type in a VW microbus on my right.” Dion, in the passenger seat, rolled down his window and asked, “Do you know how to get to LAX?”
“Yes,” the hippie answered cheerfully. Then he pulled away.* 
“That was it. I was burnt out,” Denton says. “Dion took over.” Dion clarified nearly four decades later: “Denton drove like an old lady.”
Encountering traffic at a construction standstill on the 405, Gennady began to sweat. “If I don’t make my plane, I am in big trouble.” Dion, whom Jack was now calling Tracker, pulled a red police beacon from under his seat, plugged it in, and slapped it on the roof of the car. Blaring the horn, Dion pulled onto the shoulder and floored it.
When they neared LAX, a police car spotted the vehicle roaring down La Cienega Boulevard and gave chase. “Shit! Cops!” Jack said. Employing an old favorite tactic of underworld wheelmen on the run from the Feds, Tracker Dion diverted the vehicle onto a side street and cut in front of a line of cars waiting at a car wash, waving his badge out the window. “Move!” As the other patrons surely wondered why the hell an FBI agent needed a car wash so urgently, Dion hid their car between two giant brushes and cascades of water. When they thought they had lost the cops (even though two of them were cops), the gang pulled out of the car wash and drew down on LAX, the engine beginning to overheat. With smoke whistling out of the hood, Dion barreled into LAX, popped the trunk, and they all got out.
“We raced past the airport lines, screaming, ‘This is a diplomat! This is a diplomat!’” says Denton, who had earlier presented the diplomat with a parting gift. “I gave Gennady a clip of bullets to use as a paperweight. He got them on[to] the plane. It was a different time, that’s for sure.” Gennady used every bit of his athleticism to sprint to his plane, which he made just as the door to the gate was closing.
“After he gets on the plane, we go back to the car, which is smoking, brakes wrecked,” says a chuckling Dion. No one remembers what happened to the abused FBI car or what excuse was given to headquarters as to its miserable state—but it was clean!
Back in DC, the men reported to their various bosses and dutifully filed their operational reports. “In our shooting range report we called Gennady ‘orgasmic,’” remembers Denton. “We were promptly ordered to clean up our language.” Cowboy received a serious dressing-down from Forden for not pitching his Soviet target. But Cowboy knew he was playing the Russian right, and Forden’s tongue lashing didn’t register one whit.
For his part, Gennady met with Yakushkin, who ordered him to end all contact with Platt and the others, a directive that also went in one ear and out the other. Soon thereafter, Gennady called his “uncle” George Powstenko for lunch—the same uncle who, unbeknownst to Gennady, helped set up the “coincidental” road trip.
 
  GENNADY: I just had a great time in California with FBI guys. 
  GEORGE: Oh, really? 
  GENNADY: You should meet them. We’ll get lunch and drink vodka. 
  GEORGE: No way! We’ll get killed!

After the lunch, Ukrainian George called Mad Dog Denton, imploring, “Don’t hurt [Gennady]. He’s a good guy.” From that point on, Dion used George as a conduit to reach Gennady at the embassy. When Gennady initiated the contact, he used a code, assuming he was being monitored. Dion recalls, “When Gennady wanted to get together with us, he’d call George and say, ‘Let’s go to the junkyard. I need car parts’ or ‘I need some Visine’ or ‘I want to go look at a Chevy Blazer that’s for sale.’” The references were all too clear to the Musketeers: the junkyard referred to Gennady’s actual trips with the others to get cheap car parts, the Blazer recalled their jaunt in the California desert with the Chevy Blazer, and the Visine was Jack’s joke, a treatment to “get the Red out.”
Dion remembers a typical getaway with the Russian: “We were in Gennady’s car going to lunch in Arlington, where he was living. We were near the Washington Monument—I remember it like it was yesterday. All of a sudden, Gennady slows down and a car pulls along his driver’s side. I recognized the passenger as a KGB guy I’d been following. It was unclear if he recognized me. Still, I’m thinking, It’s a setup. We’re done for. Just then Gennady reaches into the back seat and grabs a paper bag and hands it to the KGB guys through the window. They pull away. It was an arranged handoff.”

  DION: What was that? 
  GENNADY: Just a bag of bullets.

On still another excursion, Jack, Dion, and Gennady were with Powstenko in his Mercedes, on the way to Powstenko’s house in Bethany Beach, Delaware, when a car bearing “R” diplomatic tags (KGB) approached them from behind. “This time it was Gennady’s face that went white, and he slumped down in his seat,” says Rankin. “But they didn’t stop. They just passed us without giving us a glance. It was just a coincidence. They were probably going to the Soviet retreat house on the Chesapeake. It was one of the rare times that Gennady didn’t shrug it off.”
“Jack’s wife, Paige, finally met Gennady at a Cherry Blossom Parade in downtown Washington,” remembers Dion, who was there with his wife, Jenny. “She posed as Jack’s girlfriend, using the bizarre masculine cover name ‘Thomas Gordon.’”
Jack worried how they would find Gennady in the huge crowd. Paige had no such worries. “He’s a trained KGB spy. If we just stay in one place, he’ll find us—you know, like dogs do.” He did.
Shortly thereafter, Gennady defied Yakushkin, who had forbidden him from seeing Dion, the nemesis of KGB agents like Alexander Kukhar, and showed up at the FBI man’s home in Crofton, Maryland, for a dinner party.
“Gennady’s wife, Irina, brought their kids, Ilya and Julia. This was before they turned fourteen and were forbidden from living abroad. Ilya found my credentials and badge on the microwave, put it on. ‘This is our secret,’ I told him, and he agreed. Of course, he immediately went down to the basement where everybody was visiting and announced, ‘Mister Rankin and I have a secret!’” Dion took Gennady outside and suggested, “You should talk to your son about this.”
Introducing Gennady to the Platt family was fraught with a different sort of peril. Upon escorting Gennady into the Platt family residence for the first time, Jack reminded the randy Russian to stay away from his wife and three teenaged daughters. According to Jack, within three days Gennady had hit on all of them. Of course, in Gennady’s mind, he was just being friendly.
But despite the growing mutual trust and Gennady’s obvious taste for Western culture, it was, according to Mad Dog Denton, also beginning to dawn on the Americans that Gennady would never be recruited. “The family would have to be sent back to Russia soon, and by Russian law at the time, they couldn’t come back with their kids. If it weren’t for that, we might have eventually gotten him,” says Denton. “In those days, kids over fourteen couldn’t join their parents overseas. They were like hostages to guarantee that their parents wouldn’t defect.”
As the Musketeers steeled themselves for the departure of their great new Russian friend, they knew there was a good chance they’d never see him again.
They couldn’t know that their greatest adventures still lay ahead




