Oct 19, 2016
Shearer memo
https://justthenews.com/sites/default/files/2020-12/ShearerDossierFBICopy.pdf

Company Note
We received this report from Jon WINER, US State Department on 18 October 2016.
It is the second in this series we have seen.
We consider it potentially significant and apologise in advance for its rough format.
The sub-source, as we understand it, is a Turkish businessman with strong Russian, including FSB links.
He is in touch with Cody SHEARER, a contact of Sydney BLUMENTHAL, a friend of the CLINTONs, who passed it to WINER.
We have no means of verifying the source/s or information but note that some of the reporting is remarkably similar to our own, albeit from a completely different sourcing chain, and therefore could be important collateral, especially on the reported Ritz Carlton incident in 2013; TRUMP's compromise by the FSB (and knowledge of itJ; and subsequent Kremlin funding of the TRUMP campaign (through the AGALAROVs).
We judge that WINER at least would be happy to discuss all this it rther with you.

19 October 2016

I asked my FSB Federal Security Service source why he was talking to me He responded that he was concerned about the behavior of the hotheads within the FSB.
The FSB successor to the KGB's domestic side he said had been involved in foreign intelligence gathering for a long time particularly the political unit.
He said a military wing of the GRU was overseeing hacking operation in US.
He noted that there is a division within the FSB which he is part of that thinks the existence of a "pervasive" and sophisticated intelligence operation focusing on pivotal US personalities is widely known specifically the Donald Trump operation He said the Trump operation was an open secret in Putin's government circle.
The question among FSB employees he said is how far this should go.
He described these operations as utter madness.
H esaid there are two elements as to why Americans should care about what the FSB is doing.
The Americans are being scrweed around with by a foreign power.
By helping expose and embarrass Putin in regards to what he ha done with Trump which has spiraled out of control might eventually improve relations between the US and Russia because what he has done is dangerous.
He repeated that Trump whom he described as a delicate target was filmed twice in Moscow in November 2013 during the Ms.
Universe pageant.
Once in the presidential suite of the Ritz Carlton Hotel and a second time at the Crocus shopping mall where the pageant was held.
He said there is a special complex for distinguished guests in the chef Crocus complex with all the amenities including a pool.
This complex is owned by the Agalarov family.
He said he believes a copy of the sex videos is in Bulgaria, Israel, and FSB political unit vaults in Moscow.
Having seen the videos he described Trump's behavior as very dark.
He said this guy has mental issues with women.
He deosn't act normal.
There is a lot of penetration, all forms of penetration, and makes her lick him.
He sticks his fingers up her ass.
He is a psychopath.
He likes to make the women screm and hurt them.
From observing Trump for years in previous visits to Moscow, the FSB knew he had a weakness for women.
But he said Trump's behavior illustrated trhat he really did not like women.
He said that he knew that Trump eventually learned that he had been flipped in a honeypot operation in Moscow.
He was also filmed in St Petersburg.
He said Trump was furious when he learned what had happened.
Many of the old Russian friends Trump used to collaborate with, he is no longer on good terms with.
He repeated that the first FSB generated payments to Trump took place in Baku at the presidential patlace.
The first one was for $10 million which Trump took personally.
The next payment of $30 million went to daughter Ivanka.
The FSB money was originally passed through Aras Agalarov the billionaire real estate mogul who served as liaison between Trump and Putin.
Anar Mamadov son of Azerbaijan Transport Minister Zya mamadov was also involved.
The presidential paalce was used because Aras Agalarov's son Emin who got Trump to perform in a music video was married to Leyla Alieyeva the glamarous daughter of Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev.
Among other reasont Trump promised to support President Aliyev politically after he was delivered the $10 million and promised to organize a visit of congressman to Baku.
My FSB source asked me to look into the Trump congressional trip to Baku with some congressman from both political parties.
