https://steemit.com/deepstate/@nigelmarkdias/palpatine-s-revenge-deep-state-shadow-government-and-freedom

Dooku: RR isn't taking shit.. and he knows our friends have stuff on him.
Dooku: I'm hearing Mueller, maybe by the end of the week
Severus: Hearing that too.. WH will be blind-sided. Let's put MF back in the news? Can have S draw up memo on Turkey. With Erdogan thugs beating protesters in the streets, it fits news cycle, and I'm sure we'll need a few more "memos" down the road. Good practice
Huck: I'm in. S, you in here? Our friends in NY still have secure connection set up waiting
Roger: MF was mentioned in company group too... Evidently their work on the limey is paying off.
Dooku: Paying off how?
Dooku: Getting to him?
Roger: Yea.. he mentioned Limey in a call earlier this week. Scared shitless
Severus: He isn't the brightest bulb, but that project has worked perfectly.
Roger: It really has. Huck, didn't AEWP mention it when we gave him that tape?
Huck: Not AE, but someone else there. Not sure who. I wasn't listening in, but our carrier pigeon said in debrief that they said something along the lines of: "No wonder no one in our business has called Limey out, what's the point when you all keep bringing us great stuff? It actually helps our pageviews when she gets all of her minions fired up with dumb shit first"
Severus: That's fuckin amazing
Juules: Hey all, been watching in. Here with S in GT outpost. All go from us. Huck, will send memo to usual place. Do your magic.
Juules: Roger, any update on Camp Eagle.?
Roger: Asset en route. Don't expect much from it. He's been out far too long
Juules: Figures. Ok, Huck, keep that connection open and expect something to come through pipeline a little later. Just stall them. RM is happening tonight, so they'll have plenty to cover.
Dooku: Tonight. Fuck. Quicker than I thought.
Huck: Connection will remain open. Let me know if we want to tip on RM
Juules: Just let it ride
Juules: Today's time is up. Everyone knows what to do. Tomorrow will be busy day for all, so will let everyone know what time when S hears from grapvine
