Jan 30, 2017
NYDFS Enforcement Action: Consent Order to in the Matter of Deutsche Bank AG
web.archive.org/web/20170201203101/http://www.dfs.ny.gov/about/ea/ea170130.pdf

NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT
OF FINANCIAL SERVICES 

In the Matter of
DEUTSCHE BANK AG and
DEUTSCHE BANK AG NEW YORK BRANCH

CONSENT ORDER UNDER 
NEW YORK BANKING LAW §§ 39, 44 and 44-a

The New York State Department of Financial Services (the "Department"),
Deutsche Bank AG and Deutsche Bank AG New York Branch (the "New York Branch"),
(together, "Deutsche Bank," or the "Bank"), agree: 

Introduction 

The Culture of Compliance in the Age of Risk 

  1. Global financial institutions serve as the first line of defense against illegal
financial transactions in today's fast-paced, interconnected financial network. New York
and federal law require these institutions to design, implement, and execute policies and
systems to prevent and detect illegal financial transactions. The Bank Secrecy Act
("BSA"), for example, requires these institutions to report suspicious transactions (via
"Suspicious Activity Reports" or "SARs") to the U.S. Treasury Department's Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network ("FinCEN"), enabling law enforcement to conduct
investigations that result in the future interdiction of these transactions and, ultimately,
prosecution or the blocking ofbad actors. The BSA likewise requires financial institutions
to have adequate anti-money laundering ("AML") systems in place. 

2. New York law imposes these same requirements on its regulated financial
institutions. Specifically, the law obligates financial institutions to devise and implement
systems reasonably designed to identify and block suspicious activity and transactions
prohibited by law. Each institution is expected to configure a system based on the
particular risks faced by the institution, considering such factors as its size, geographical
reach, and specific lines of business. Moreover, the institution must employ or engage
sufficient numbers of trained compliance professionals to ensure that its systems run
properly.

  3. To strengthen anti-money laundering efforts, New York law imposes
additional requirements on regulated institutions, obligating them to maintain effective
programs to monitor and filter transactions to screen for money laundering and bar
transactions with sanctioned entities. Additionally, to both protect consumers and the
safety and soundness of financial institutions, the Department has proposed regulations
requiring regulated entities to adopt a series of measures to prevent against cyber attacks.

4. Ultimate responsibility for design and implementation of such policies and
systems belongs at the institution's top echelon. The board of directors and senior
management must devote careful study to the design of the anti-money laundering and
other compliance systems that lie at the core of this first line of defense, and must ensure
sufficient resources to undergird these systems and structures. Adequate staffing must be
put in place, and training must be ongoing. 

  5. Summary of Findings: As set forth more fully below, this Consent Order
addresses serious compliance deficiencies identified in the Department's investigation that
spanned Deutsche Bank's global enterprise. These flaws allowed a corrupt group of bank
traders and offshore entities to improperly and covertly transfer more than $10 billion out
of Russia, by conscripting Deutsche Bank operations in Moscow, London and New York
to their improper purpose.

  6. The suspicious security trading schemes identified - termed "mirror trades"
-permitted this corrupt consortium to move very large sums of money out of Russia under
the radar and without the scrutiny ofDeutsche Bank's compliance function. By converting
rubles into dollars through security trades that had no discernible economic purpose, the
scheme was a means for bad actors within a financial institution to achieve improper ends
while evading compliance with applicable laws.

  7. Afflicted with inadequate AML control policies, procedures, and structures,
Deutsche Bank missed several key opportunities to identify and interdict this scheme.
Moreover, the suspicious mirror-trading machinations occurred at a time Deutsche Bank
was on clear notice of numerous deficiencies in its BSA/ AML systems and management,
and yet the steps it took to remediate the situation proved seriously inadequate.
8. For these reasons, the Department has entered into this Consent Order with
the consent and agreement of Deutsche Bank to resolve this matter as set forth below and
without further proceedings. 

Factual Findings

The Mirror-Trading Scheme at Deutsche Bank's
Moscow, London and New York Offices 

  9. The Mirrm·-Trading" Scheme: The "mirror trading" scheme at issue
here was simple and effective. Deutsche Bank Trust Company of the Americas
("DBTCA"), an entity located at 60 Wall Street, New York, New York which is licensed
and supervised by the Department, was the entity through which the U.S. dollar payments
flowed to the suspicious entities involved here.

  10. Operating through the securities desk at Deutsche Bank's Moscow affiliate
("DB-Moscow"), certain companies that were clients of that desk routinely issued orders
to purchase Russian blue chip stocks, always paying in rubles. The size ofthe typical order
ranged in value from $2 to $3 million.

  11. Shortly thereafter - indeed, sometimes the very same day - a related
counterparty would sell the identical Russian blue chip stock in the same quantity and at
the same price through Deutsche Bank's London branch ("DB-London"). The
counterparties to the trade were actually closely related on both sides, such as through
common ownership.

  12. None of these "mirror trades" demonstrated any legitimate economic
rationale. The counterparties frequently lost money on these trades, due to fees and
commissions that were substantially credited to DB-Moscow by Deutsche Bank pursuant
to the brokerage arrangements between Moscow and London.

  13. For example, typically, it made no difference to the counterparties the
particular security to be bought or sold. All that mattered was that there was a matching
trade available. In one instance, a counterparty representative, who was buying shares for 
one counterparty and selling the identical shares for a related counterparty, told a DBMoscow
trader, "/ have a billion rouble today . ... Will you be able to find a security for
this size?"

  14. In another case, a counterparty representative, when told by a DB-Moscow
trader there were no Sberbank Russian shares available for a mirror trade, immediately
switched the order to Gazprom Russian shares. No rationale for this switch was apparent;
no trading hypothesis was offered.

  15. Moreover, a number ofthe selling counterparties were registered in offshore
territories, like Cyprus or the British Virgin Islands. The seller would be paid for its shares
in U.S. dollars, which were routinely cleared through DBTCA. Thus, by virtue of this
scheme, the counterparties were able to surreptitiously convert rubles into U.S. dollars
using Deutsche Bank.

  16. While offsetting trades are not inherently illegal, where - as here - they lack
obvious economic purpose and could be used to facilitate money laundering or other illicit
conduct, they are highly suggestive of financial crime.

  17. The scheme was well-developed, running between 2011 and early 2015. At
least 12 entities were involved in these suspicious trading activities, and the entities were 
closely related, linked, for example, by common beneficial owners, management, or agents.
Certain individuals were employed by several ofthe different counterparties. For example,
one person was the chairman of the Board of Directqrs of one entity, as well as the
beneficial owner of another entity - which was itself the 100 percent shareholder of the
first counterparty. Similarly, several counterparties were registered at the same address. 

  18. "One-Legged" Trades: The DB-Moscow securities desk also facilitated a
second type of suspicious trading activity with the same suspect counterparties - trades
that appeared to be one leg of a mirror trade that may have involved a second (unidentified)
financial institution to execute the other leg ("one-legged trades"). These trades were
almost entirely buy transactions involving the same counterparties involved in the mirror
trades.

  19. Roughly the same group oftraders involved with the DB-Moscow securities
desk also performed these one-legged trades. Moreover, the payments made by Deutsche
Bank for these counterparties - which likewise flowed through DBTCA - were made
almost entirely to accounts at banks outside of Russia and the U.K.

  20. Active Facilitation by DB-Moscow Traders: The evidence is clear that
DB-Moscow traders knowingly and ·actively facilitated both of these trading schemes.

  21. For example, most of the subject trades were placed by a single trader
representing both sides of the transaction. The DB-Moscow trader would execute the sell
side of the trade, helping the suspicious Russian counterparty acquire Russian securities,
settled in rubles. The same DB-Moscow trader then would buy the identical quantity of
the same stock from DB-London's customer as an over-the-counter trade, settled in U.S. 
dollars. The DB-Moscow trader would directly book the trade to the DB-London trading
book via a remote booking function.

  22. This "remote-booking" feature was central to the scheme, permitting the
Moscow traders to carry out the mirror trades without any effective supervision or
compliance review in London. This way, the scheme stayed under the radar.

  23. Traders on the DB-Moscow desk sometimes would go to significant lengths
to facilitate the suspicious trades. When Deutsche Bank suspended one of the
counterparties involved in the scheme, for example, DB-Moscow traders continued to
effectuate the mirror trades by pre-arranging the timing of the bid and offers with the
suspended counterparty on the Russian Moscow Exchange (MICEX).

  24. When one trader on the Moscow desk expressed concern about the lack of
any economic rationale behind these numerous trades, colleagues on the desk assured the
concerned trader that these trades had been sanctioned by a supervisor. When other traders·
raised similar issues about the suspicious trading activity, the supervisor was dismissive of
their concerns. 

  25. Greed and Corruption Motivated the DB-Moscow Traders: In 2006
and 2007, the yearly revenues generated for Deutsche Bank by the Russian business line
at issue here approximated €169 million and €123 million, respectively. Following the
global financial crisis in 2008 and Deutsche Bank's internal restructuring, that profit
decreased at least by half, putting pressure on traders to increase revenue.

  26. An easy commission scheme was attractive for the traders on the Moscow
securities desk. Traders conceded·they did not forcefully question these suspicious trades,
because they were earning commissions at a time when trading had dramatically slowed. 

  27. Furthermore, a supervisor on the Moscow desk appears to have been paid a
bribe or other undisclosed compensation to facilitate the schemes. The supervisor's close
relative, who apparently had a background in historical art, and not finance, was also the
apparent beneficial owner of two offshore companies, one each located in the British
Virgin Islands and Cyprus (both high-risk jurisdictions for money laundering). In April
and again in June 2015, one ofthe key counterparties involved in the mirror-trading scheme
made payments totaling $250,000 to one of the companies owned by this close relative,
allegedly pursuant to a "consulting agreement." Payments to one of these two companies,
totaling approximately $3.8 million, were almost exclusively identified for the purported
purpose of "financial consulting," and largely originated from two companies registered in
Belize.

  28. These suspicious payments, too, were cleared through DBTCA in New
York.

  29. The above demonstrates that a corporate culture that allows for short-term
profiteering through improper conduct, at the expense of robust compliance, turns out to
be much more expensive in the long run to an institution in regulatory, reputational, and
other costs.
In Excess of $10 Billion of Scheme Proceeds Flowed Through New York

  30. As noted above, DBTCA is a U.S. subsidiary of Deutsche Bank located on
Wall Street that, among other things, conducts correspondent banking and U.S. dollar 
clearing activity for customers of the Bank, including other financial institutions.5
DBTCA is chartered pursuant to Article III of the New York Banking Law and subject to
the supervision and regulation by the Department.
31. Every single one of the U.S. dollar payments involved in the mirror trading
and one-legged trading activity discussed above flowed through DBTCA. In total,
payments exceeding $10 billion were transmitted from London and through New York
as a result ofthe trading conduct facilitated by the scheme.
32. Deutsche Bank thus caused New Yark State to become a key conduit in a
long-running artifice involving highly suspicious financial activity. Deutsche Bank has
represented that it has been unable to identify the actual purpose behind this scheme. It is
obvious, though, that the scheme could have facilitated capital flight, tax evasion, or other
potentially illegal objectives. 

Deutsche Bank Missed Repeated Opportunities to
Detect the Long-Running Mirror-Trading Scheme

  33. Deutsche Bank missed a number ofkey opportunities to detect and interdict
the mirror-trading scheme (both one and two-legged). These chances arose early on in the
scheme and continued until Deutsche Bank's discovery of this scheme in February 2015.
The failure to detect or escalate this misconduct reflects pervasive deficiencies at each level
of the Bank's compliance function.

  34. For example, a first opportunity arose in November 2011. DB-Moscow
entered a 900 million ruble trade on behalf of DB-London with one of the suspect 
counterparties ("Counterparty A") that failed to settle because the Russian Federal Service
for Financial Markets ("FSFM") had suspended Counterparty A's license to operate.
Although a well-established red flag, no AML review or escalation occurred.

  35. A second and strikingly clear warning arose shortly thereafter in November
2011, when a mainstream Russian-language business journal noted that the FSFM had
suspended the operating licenses of several financial firms for engaging in suspicious
trading. The article described an artifice very similar to the instant mirror trade scheme:
According to an intelligence officer, the scheme operated as follows: 

    a client wishing to move the money transferred the funds to a brokerage firm which then
    bought blue chips . . . . Then the shares were sold in favor of a company-nonresident
    . . . which then sold the securities on the market and transferred the
    money minus the commission fee to the client abroad. The law enforcement
    authorities believe that approximately 100 billion rubles were siphoned abroad
    in this manner this year.
    Notably, Counterparty A was identified in the article.

  36. The business journal article led to an e-mail circulated to several members
of management, in both Moscow and London, requesting that certain trading accounts be
suspended. The e-mail also contained a link to the article, and its recipients included a
senior compliance staffer in London, along w~th several chief operating officers for various
interested divisions. Numerous responsible managers were thus on notice of this serious
AML controls issue.

  37. Further, senior Deutsche Bank employees continued to discuss, for several
months, how to obtain payment for the failed trades involving the suspended counterparty,
which apparently cost the bank about $1.5 million in profit. Despite these conversations,
at no time did anyone at the Bank undertake to escalate or investigate the basis for the
revocation of a customer's operating license, or its connection to the money laundering
scheme specified in the article. 

  38. Yet a third oppmiunity to detect the suspicious mirror trading activity
occurred in January 2014, when a European financial institution (the "European Bank")
sent a Request for Assistance ("RFA") to DB-London. The European Bank had been
prompted to send the RF A after reviewing 20 transactions originating with Deutsche Bank
and involving another of the suspicious counterparties ("Counterparty B"). Seeking more
information about the relationship between and transactions involving DB-London and
Counterparty B, the European Bank specifically asked whether DB-London had "any
reason to believe that the transactions [with Counterparty BJ are in any way of a
suspicious nature."

  39. Upon receiving no response, the European Bank sent several reminders to
DB-London. Eventually, the DB-Moscow supervisor (the one whose close relative
received substantial undisclosed and suspicious payments) responded by reassuring the
European Bank that Counterparty B "ha[s] passed through our KYC [know-yourcustomer]
procedures" and that Deutsche Bank "see[s] no reason for concern here." Not
a single Deutsche Bank compliance staffer was ever involved in the response to this RF A
provided by the corrupt supervisor to the European Bank.

  40. Notably, only days before this response was sent to the European Bank by
the supervisor at DB-Moscow, DBTCA's AML Compliance unit sent its own RFA to the
European Bank inquiring about Counterparty B. DBTCA's information request had been
spurred by an alert generated by a transaction monitoring system located at DBTCA.
Based on the DB-Moscow supervisor's assurances, the European Bank relayed back to
DBTCA that it had no adverse information about Counterparty B.

  41. Subsequently, in light of the contradictory information about Counterparty
B received from two different components of Deutsche Bank (which did not communicate
with each other), the European Bank contacted a senior Anti-Financial Crime ("AFC")
employee at DBTCA who supervised special investigations, in an attempt to reconcile
these concerns. The senior compliance employee never responded to the European Bank.
Nor did the employee take any steps to investigate the basis for the European Bank's
inquiry, later explaining this omission on the ground that the employee had "too many
jobs" and "had to deal with many things and had to prioritize."

  42. Just as troubling, through a leak apparently originating with Deutsche Bank,
Counterparty B was informed ofthe European Bank's RFA. This was a very serious breach
of anti-money laundering and corruption policies and practices. Yet when the leak came
to the attention of senior DB-Moscow management, no action to investigate the leak was
taken. 

  43. A fourth opportunity to detect the mirror-trading scheme occurred several
months later. In approximately April 2014, Deutsche Bank identified problematic trading
involving another of the counterparties ("Counterparty C"). About the same time,
Deutsche Bank received information from a Russian regulator that Counterparty C was
involved in a money laundering and tax evasion scheme. Trading with Counterparty C was
suspended, and some preliminary investigation identified suspicious trading with
additional counterparties. However, no further escalation occurred, despite the emergence
of an unmistakable pattern of suspicious trading at the securities desk at DB-Moscow.

  44. Subsequently, between April and September 2014, DB-Moscow identified
additional suspicious mirror trading activity involving several other counterparties
("Counterparties D and E"). Although DB-Moscow suspended trading with Counterparties
D and E, and a certain level of escalation occurred involving the AFC Unit at DB-London,
Deutsche Bank again failed at the time to conduct a broader investigation that would have
uncovered the entirety of the scheme.

Numerous Compliance Deficiencies Allowed for the
Mirror-Trading Scheme to Flourish at Deutsche Bank 

  45. Numerous compliance failures at Deutsche Bank allowed for the mirrortrading
scheme to flourish. The deficiencies are extensive and are catalogued only
generally below.

  46. Flaws in KYC Policies and Procedures: During the relevant period
Deutsche Bank suffered from widespread and well-known weaknesses in its KYC
processes for onboarding new clients. KYC procedures were manual and functioned
merely as a checklist, with employees mechanically focused on ensuring documentation
was collected, rather than shining a critical light on information provided by potential
customers.

  47. Even so, inadequate documentation typically characterized many of the
onboarding files at DB-Moscow's securities desk. Nor were any steps taken to periodically
review and verify clients once brought in. Notably, Deutsche Bank's Russia operations 
scored the worst out of 28 countries whose KYC procedures were reviewed by Deutsche
Bank in an internal report released to senior management in early 2014. 

  48. Virtually all of the KYC files for the counterparties implicated here were
insufficient. Moreover, because no central repository for KYC information existed at
Deutsche Bank, when the Bank suspended a counterparty for suspicious trading, a related
counterparty was able to get onboarded and resume trading activity without raising any red
flags.

  49. Further, the Moscow supervisor who oversaw the mirror trading was
actively involved in the onboarding and KYC documentation of counterparties involved in
the scheme. Bank onboarding staff experienced hostility and threats from the supervisor
on several occasions when it appeared they had not moved quickly enough to facilitate
transactions.

  50. Distressingly, this was a fact about which senior management at DBMoscow
was aware, yet management's response was inadequate. Indeed, although
deficiencies in KYC policies and procedures were well known for many years, Deutsche
Bank did not take sufficient action to implement genuine reform until 2016.

  51. Flaws in the AML Risk Rating System: Deutsche Bank failed to
accurately rate its AML country and client risks throughout the relevant time period. The
Bank lacked a global policy benchmarking its risk appetite, resulting in material
inconsistencies and no methodology for updating the ratings. Nor was Deutsche Bank in
line with peer banks, which rated Russia as high risk well before Deutsche Bank did in late
2014. 

  52. Although Deutsche Bank Group Audit specifically identified deficiencies
in the Bank's risk rating methodology in a Global Anti-Money Laundering Report prepared
in 2012, DB-Moscow resisted adopting modified risk rating procedures because most of
their clients would be re-classified as high risk, and the office lacked the operational
resources required to handle the increased compliance workload.

  53. Inadequate Compliance and Internal Audit Resources: These
deficiencies were exacerbated by Deutsche Bank's ineffective and understaffed AFC,
AML, and Compliance Units. At a time that it was increasing risk in various business
segments, the Bank's intense focus on headcount reduction between 2010 and 2012
prevented the AFC and Compliance units in DB-Moscow and elsewhere from being staffed
with the resources necessary to function effectively.

  54. A senior compliance staffer repeatedly stated that he had to "beg, borrow,
and steal" to receive the appropriate resources, leaving existing personnel scrambling to
perform multiple roles. Similarly, at one point in time, a single attorney who lacked any
compliance background served as DB-Moscow's Head of Compliance, Head of Legal, and
as its AML Officer - all at the same time. And a number of employees with leadership
positions in the AFC, AML, and Compliance groups lacked necessary experience or
training.

  55. Nor did Deutsche Bank have an automated system to monitor suspicious
securities transactions, which added to the risks of utilizing the remote booking model.
Moreover, Deutsche Bank's Group Audit also lacked in a number of ways that prevented
it from fulfilling its key role as a third line of defense behind the business and compliance
units. 

  56. Flaws in Corporate Structure and Organization: Also responsible for
the breakdown in compliance here is Deutsche Bank's decentralized AML framework,
which caused confusion in policies, roles, and responsibilities. This decentralized model
caused AML policies to be set at the regional, rather than global, level, resulting in the
inconsistent formulation and application of policies and procedures.

  57. As relevant here, DB-Moscow management focused primarily on local
regulatory requirements imposed by Russian authorities. Little or no attention was paid to
the implementation or adher_ence to controls designed to comply with international or other
country requirements. And where such policies did exist, they were frequently ill designed
and insufficient to meet the demands of the business lines involved.

  58. Additionally, a dual reporting structure and lack of clarity in job
responsibilities led to an over-reliance upon the supervisor for management of trading
activity on the DB-Moscow securities desk. A number of trading employees directly
reported to this supervisor, and while the trading employees also had dotted line reporting
to individuals at DB-London, no concerns relevant to the suspicious trading activities were
ever escalated out of Moscow.

  59. Nor was there any effective oversight ofthe Moscow securities supervisor.
His local manager, who was assigned to a different business group, did not understand such
oversight to be part of his responsibilities. Moreover, the Moscow supervisor's direct
supervisor in London failed to exercise any reasonable oversight over the Moscow
supervisor; compliance topics generally were not discussed during regular business calls
or meetings, and the Moscow supervisor's superiors failed to review reports with an eye
towards non-compliant or suspicious activity.

  60. Indeed, the supervisor's direct manager praised the work of the supervisor
for engaging local clients with global products - creating the pernicious culture that gave
rise to the improper trading scheme and permitted it to continue uninterrupted for a fiveyear
stretch. In short, Deutsche Bank's AML control failures were longstanding and
enterprise-wide, enabling the mirror trade scheme to flourish and persist. 

Deutsche Bank's Substantial History of Regulatory Violations Placed It
On Firm Notice That Schemes Like Mirror Trading Might Occur

  61. Deutsche Bank has a substantial history of regulatory violations over the
last decade - one that placed it squarely on notice of the need to address potential
compliance issues that permitted the mirror-trading scheme to fester.

  62. In October 2005, DBTCA entered into a Written Agreement with the
Department (via its predecessor agency) after anti-money laundering and compliance
programs related to its correspondent banking and dollar-clearing services were found to
be substantially deficient Deutsche Bank agreed to make a variety of reforms designed to
create an effective control environment for these business lines.

  63. In April 2015, Deutsche Bank entered into a Consent Order with the
Department arising out of its failure to employ relevant and specific systems and controls
to prevent manipulation ofthe LIB OR and IBOR rate-setting process. The conduct at issue
occurred for the time period 2005 through 2009 - right after entry of DBTCA's Written
Agreement with the Department - and was systemic. The LIBOR manipulation issues had
been known to the Bank from at least 2008, and even after being placed on notice, the Bank
failed to address the absence of relevant systems and controls. The Bank paid a penalty of
$600 million to the Department, and agreed to install an independent monitor to
recommend and implement important compliance reforms. 

  64. On November 3, 2015, the Bank entered into another Consent Order with
the Department, arising out of the Bank's use of non-transparent methods and practices to
conduct nearly $11 billion in dollar-clearing transactions on behalf of Iranian, Libyan,
Syrian, Burmese, and Sudan financial institutions and other entities subject to U.S.
economic sanctions.· The conduct at issue occurred during the time period 1999 through
2006. One of the main purposes of the non-transparent practices at issue was to keep the
Bank's U.S. staff in the dark about sanctions connections of the payments they were
processing through New York. The Bank paid a penalty of$200 million to the Department,
and again agreed to engage an independent monitor to "conduct a comprehensive review
ofthe Bank's existing BSA/ AML and OF AC sanctions compliance programs, policies, and
procedures in place at the Bank that pertain to or affect activities conducted by or through
Deutsche Bank New York"; which included a review of the "thoroughness and
comprehensiveness of the Bank's current global BSA/AML and OFAC compliance
program."

  65. In light of this regulatory history, the suspicious mirror trading activity,
which commenced in 2011 and continued until as recently as February 2015, occurred after
the Bank was on clear notice of serious and widespread compliance issues dating back a
decade.

  66. Once the mirror trade scheme became sufficiently elevated within Deutsche
Bank's investigation function (in March 2015), the Bank commenced an internal
investigation designed to identify the background of the suspicious trades, as well as
understand to what extent Bank employees were aware ofthese activities and its associated
risks. 

  67. The Bank timely self-reported its initial assessment of the internal
investigation to the Department. Since then, it appears to the Department that the Bank
has conducted an internal investigation consistent with the stated mission, and has done so
in a serious manner and timely fashion, keeping the Department informed of its findings.
While much more remains to be done, the Bank has taken certain necessary steps toward
remediation.

  68. In setting forth the violations and remedies below, the Department
recognizes and credits the forthright manner in which Deutsche Bank performed its internal
investigation, and its timely communications with the Department. 

Violations of Law and Regulation 

  69. Deutsche Bank has conducted its banking business m an unsafe and
unsound manner, in violation ofNew York Banking Law §§ 44, 44-a.

  70. Deutsche Bank failed to maintain an effective and compliant anti-money
laundering program, in violation of 3 N.Y.C.R.R. § 116.2.

  71. Deutsche Bank failed to maintain and make available true and accurate
books, accounts and records reflecting all transactions and actions, in violation of New
York Banking Law § 200-c. 

Settlement Provisions

Monetary Payment

  72. Deutsche Bank shall pay a civil monetary penalty pursuant to Banking Law
§§ 39, 44 and 44-a to the Department in the amount of $425,000,000 as a result of the
conduct and violations set forth above. The Bank shall pay the entire amount within ten
(10) days of executing this Consent Order. Deutsche Bank agrees that it will not claim, 
assert, or apply for a tax deduction or tax credit with regard to any U.S. federal, state, or
local tax, directly or indirectly, for any portion of the civil monetary penalty paid pursuant
to this Consent Order. 

Independent Monitor 

  73. Within sixty (60) days of this Order, Deutsche Bank, DBTCA and the New
York Branch shall engage an independent monitor (the "Independent Monitor") to:
conduct a comprehensive review of the Bank's existing BSA/AML compliance programs,
policies and procedures in place at the Bank that pertain to or affect activities conducted
by or through (a) DBTCA and (b) the New York Branch.

  74. The Independent Monitor will be selected by the Department in the exercise
of its sole discretion, and will report directly to the Department. The term of the
Independent Monitor will be up to two years. The Department will consider whether one
of the two existing independent monitors currently in place at Deutsche Bank may expand
its assignment to include the work contemplated in this Order; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall so require the Department to expand any such assignment of any other
independent monitor, and the Department reserves the right in its sole discretion to require
engagement of an additional independent monitor.

  75. Within thirty (30) days of the selection of the Independent Monitor,
Deutsche Bank, DBTCA and the New York Branch shall jointly submit to the Department
for approval an engagement letter that provides, at a minimum, for the Independent
Monitor to review and report on: 


    a. 	 The el~ments of the Bank's corporate governance that contributed to or
         facilitated the improper conduct discussed in this Consent Order and 
         that permitted it to go on, relevant changes or reforms to corporate
          governance that the Bank has made since the time of the conduct
          discussed in this Consent Order, and whether those changes or reforms
          are likely to significantly enhance the Bank's BSA/AML compliance
          going forward; 

    b. 	 The thoroughness and comprehensiveness of the Bank's current global
          BSA/ AML compliance programs, including, but not limited to,
          compliance programs designed to address the conduct discussed in this
          Consent Order; 
          
    c. 	 The organizational structure, management oversight, and reporting lines
          that are relevant to BSA/ AML compliance, and an assessment of the
          staffing of the BSA/ AML compliance teams globally, including the
          duties, responsibilities, authority, and competence of officers or
          employees responsible for the Bank's compliance with laws and
          regulations pertaining to BSA/ AML compliance; 
          
     d. 	The propriety, reasonableness and adequacy of any proposed, planned,
           or recently-instituted changes to the -Bank's BSA/AML compliance
           programs; and 
           
     e. 	Any corrective measures necessary to address identified weaknesses or
           deficiencies in the Bank's corporate governance or its global BSA/AML
           compliance programs. 
           
   76. On a date to be agreed upon in the engagement letter, the Independent
Monitor shall submit to the Bank a written report on its findings and recommendations (the
"AML Compliance Report").

  77. Within sixty (60) days ofreceiving the AML Compliance Report, the Bank
will submit to the Department a written plan to improve and enhance the current global
BSA/ AML compliance programs that pertain to or affect activities conducted by or through
DBTCA and the New York Branch, including, but not limited to, activities of the kind
discussed in this Consent Order (the "Action Plan").

  78. The Action Plan will provide recommendations for enhanced internal
controls and updates or revisions to current policies, procedures, and processes in order to
ensure full compliance with all applicable provisions of the BSA, related rules and
regulations, and applicable New York law and regulations, and the provisions of this
Consent Order, incorporating the corrective measures identified in the AML Compliance
Report.

  79. The Action Plan shall also provide recommendations to improve and
enhance management oversight of BSA/ AML compliance programs, policies, and
procedures now in place at the Bank, to provide a sustainable management oversight
framework, incorporating the corrective measures identified in the AML Compliance
Report.

  80. Should the Bank take the position that any of the corrective measures
identified by the Independent Monitor should not be adopted by the Bank, the Bank shall,
within forty-five (45) days ofreceiving the Compliance Report, so notify the Independent
Monitor and the Department, specifying in writing the grounds for this position. 

81. In consultation with the Independent Monitor, the Department will review
and determine, in its sole discretion, whether to require the Bank to adopt the
recommendations to which the Bank has objected, whether to agree with the Bank, and/or
whether some other action should be taken by the Bank to achieve the remediation
contemplated by this Consent Order.

  82. The Independent Monitor will thereafter oversee the implementation of any
corrective measures undertaken pursuant to the AML Compliance Report and/or plans
discussed above in Paragraphs 73 through 81.

  83. The Independent Monitor will assess the Bank's compliance with its
corrective measures and will submit subsequent progress reports and a final report to the
Department and the Bank, as determined by the Department in its sole discretion. The
Department may, in its sole discretion, extend any reporting deadline set forth in this Order.

  84. The term of the Independent Mo!litor's engagement will extend for up to
two years from the date ofits formal engagement by the Bank; provided, however, that the
term may be extended further, in the Department's sole discretion, if Deutsche Bank fails
to cooperate.

  85. Any dispute as to the scope of the Independent Monitor's authority or
mandate will be resolved by the Department in the exercise of its sole discretion, after
consultation with the Bank and the Independent Monitor. 

Full and Complete Cooperation of Deutsche Bank

  86. Deutsche Bank and the New York Branch each agree that they will fully
cooperate with the Independent Monitor and Department, and support the Independent
Monitor's work by, among other things, providing it with access to all relevant personnel, 
consultants and third-party service providers, files, reports, or records, wherever located,
consistent with applicable law. 

Breach of Consent Order 

  87. In the event that the Department believes the Bank to be in material breach
of the Consent Order, the Department will provide written notice to the Bank and the Bank
must, within ten business days of receiving such notice, or on a later date if so determined
in the Department's sole discretion, appear before the Department to demonstrate that no
material breach has occurred or, to the extent pertinent, that the breach is not material or
has been cured.

  88. The parties understand and agree that the Bank's failure to make the
required showing within the designated time period shall be presumptive evidence of the
Bank's breach. Upon a finding that the Bank has breached this Consent Order, the
Department retains all remedies and relief available to it under the New York Banking and
Financial Services Laws, and may use any evidence available to the Department in any
ensuing orders, hearings or notices.
Waiver of Rights

  89. The parties understand and agree that no provision of this Consent Order is
subject to review in any court or tribunal outside the Department. 

Parties Bound by the Consent Order 

  90. This Consent Order is binding on the Department and Deutsche Bank and
the New York Branch, as well as any successors and assigns that are under the
Department's supervisory authority. This Consent Order does not bind any federal or other
state agency or law enforcement authority. 

  91. No further action will be taken by the Department against Deutsche Bank
for the specific conduct set forth in this Order, provided that the Bank fully complies with
the terms of this Order. Notwithstanding the foregoing or any other provision in this
Consent Order, however, the Department may undertake additional action against the Bank
for transactions or conduct of which Deutsche Bank had knowledge prior to the execution
of this Consent Order, but that Deutsche Bank did not disclose to the Department in the
written materials Deutsche Bank submitted to the Department in connection with this
matter. 

Notices 

92. All notices or communications regarding this Consent Order shall be sent
to: 

    For the Department:
    Terri-Anne Caplan
    Assistant Deputy Superintendent
    for Enforcement
    One State Street
    New York, NY 10004
    Christine Tsai 

    Attorney 

    One State Street 

    New York, NY 10004 

    For Deutsche Bank:
    Christof von Dryander 

    Co-General Counsel 

    Deutsche Bank AG 

    Taunusanlage 12 

    60325 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 

    Dr. Mathias Otto 

    Co-General Counsel Germany 

    Deutsche Bank AG 

    Taunusanlage 12 

    60325 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 

    Samuel VI. Seymour 

    Sullivan & Cromwell LLP 

    125 Broad Street 

    New York, NY 10004 
    
Miscellaneous

  93. Each provision ofthis Consent Order shall remain effective and enforceable
until stayed, modified, suspended, or terminated by the Department.

  94. No promise, assurance, representation, or understanding other than those
contained in this Consent Order has been made to induce any party to agree to the
provisions of the Consent Order
