Carter Page at the New Economic School in Moscow (July 8th, 2016)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rx5zTRJn5Gw



Thank you very much, rector Weber, to both to you and the entire New Economics School administration for the invitation to join this year's commencement.

Since your second home is in Dallas, and as you were just alluding to, where several officers were killed last night during a protest, just a few minutes from where you taught for several decades at Southern Methodist University, I just wanted to take a moment to remember them and recognize the tragic loss for your city and America.

And as you mentioned, you know the connection that it represents with with all of us here.

It's really a great honor to be speaking alongside a number of Russia's prominent leaders, including the distinguished scholar, Professor [Vladimir] Mau, on this very special day.

The impact of each of your significant accomplishments as strong, free-thinking individuals helps on many levels to explain how you ended up involved in this important institution.

Having gained a lot from Vladimir Alexandrovich's deep substantive analysis in the form of some of his past books, it's really enlightening to learn about his current outlook on how today's economic realities and world markets may mesh with potential future developments.

So I wanted to help further build upon some of his ideas by offering a few thoughts and alternative perspectives on more of a personal level.

So my remarks today will focus on ways to maximize your personal potential in uncertain times.

Similar to Professor Mau, I'm also going to frame my remarks around both the past and future [???].

Clearly, these are dynamic and often unpredictable times, so having personal strategies that help you adjust can make a really big difference.

As you embark upon your careers, I'd like to share with you a series of recommendations or observations based on some key personal lessons I've learned in my own life, and in the years past.

The first one stems from the remarks of Professor Mau, and I have to warn you, in some ways, it may sound a bit contradictory, or as some critics like to say, incoherent.

On the one hand, a great deal of flexibility is often required to survive in today's world.

On the other hand, it's also essential to keep the faith and remain committed to your core principles and dreams when the situation looks tough, and major forces seem to be pitted against you.

The second observation I had relates to the exciting transition that almost all of you are about to make in your own careers today. 

Regardless of your chosen path, the future steps which you'll take to gain knowledge of how the real world and leaders in it operate on a practical level can very often help to prevent unnecessary investigational tests.

Without these practical insights, experimental trials, which are more based solely on past negative biases and theoretical principles, can often lead you to go down in flames, as they say.

My first trip to this city occurred more than half a lifetime ago, back in June 1991, while I myself was a student.

New Economics school was not an exist existence yet, but I had the great fortune to enroll at one of this country's other top institutions, Moscow State University, which as we just saw with some of the honorees, I know you've several of you have also attended at some point in your past as undergraduates.

Since many graduates in today's audience weren't even born yet back in 1991, I can tell you that this city was of course a very different place than the one were in today.

But immediately I knew that Moscow was in many ways like a second home for myself, with unparalleled opportunities.

In the decades that followed proved my predictions to be correct on many levels.

Even back then, a key part of what excited me about Russia in general in Moscow in particular were a few basic ideas.

On the one hand, there was the extraordinarily strong character and culture of the Russian people.

Here, my practical experiences over the next quarter century proved my initial observations to be absolutely correct.

On the other hand, I also recognized the immense possibilities for partnerships with my own country in Russia.

Despite the recent events of Glasnost and Perestroika at the time, my high level of optimism was still a somewhat contrarian outlook, given the fact that the US and Russia had spent most of the past of the half most of the past half-century in an often unnecessary Cold War.

Here, my predictions were unfortunately not as accurate about that change, given the subsequent mistakes by a range of forces and in particular from those originating in my own country.

While the full specifics of that history of the 1990s is too long of a story now, and n a conversation for a different day, and the lessons learned about it.

For the time for the time being let me leave you with a related idea, and my fifth observation, which is a common denominator between our two countries is the level of misinformation that's often led to unfortunate mistakes.

In turn, this has led to personal damages for people in both of our countries.

After my graduation from the US Naval Academy in 1993, I had the privilege of serving for a few years as an arms control action officer in the Pentagon in Washington, where I focused on US-Russia arms control negotiations.

The deep and dramatic agreements being made around that era were built on a foundation of trust, which was established in the 1990s, or at least beginning to be established.

Although relationships can play a major role in establishing trust, it's by no means a panacea that can cure all problems at every juncture in history.

In this regard, President Reagan was often quoted as suggesting a special formula that could help mitigate risks.

His goal at the time was to take steps and help remedy the level of deep distrust between officials in this city and those in Washington, which had built up over the course of many decades.

This concept is based on a Russian proverb: trust, but verify. 

[???]

This leads to my sixth point, which builds upon my prior observation.

Almost by definition, verification quickly becomes almost impossible when misinformation is so pronounced.

Although I often travel to Russia over the years, I first lived here in 2004.

While I learned a great deal during those the years that followed, the education process that I watched others experience stood as the most striking lessons which led me to my next observation, and that's that all of my friends who came as my visitors from the United States, United Kingdom, and other countries in the West during this period.

They unanimously noted that there are expectations about Russia and its people were vastly exceeded by what they actually experienced on the ground.

In other words, their practical verification process often proved the fact that the misinformation about Russia was nothing short of prolific.

Going back to my first point about the need for a personal balance in combining flexibility amidst volatility and a long-term commitment to your goals, the changes in the financial markets in 2008 eventually allowed me to fulfill another lifelong objective of launching my own entrepreneurial venture.

And while the deep benefits building of building my own business has brought me are many, I should pause for a moment to just highlight a disclaimer related to what rector Weber was just speaking about a minute ago.

Basically, in my time with you today, I'm here just as a private citizen, and as an entrepreneur.

Although not always a perfect correlation, an extraordinarily benefit of life as an entrepreneur is that it very often enables you to both speak your mind and tell the truth, while allowing you to establish partnerships like like-minded leaders.

This independence helps to instill a level of integrity that can sometimes prove difficult in more traditional employee-employer relationships.

When Russia chaired the G20 in 2013, I was invited to participate in a series of expert outreach meetings with government and business leaders here in Russia, the United States, Switzerland, and France.

An NES graduate and board member who was mentioned, Senya Gaiva, led this initiative, one of many alumni from this institution who I've come to know and respect over the years.

Time is short, and I realized the moment has come to award the very well-deserved certificates and diplomas.

So I'd like to conclude with a bit of, what we call in the West as a speed-round.

It will leave you with a few quick final observations and suggestions, many of which were similarly apparent during the 2013 G20 process, which brought a very diverse group of countries and people together.

Fix yourself before you fix others.

Don't try forcing people to be something that they're not.

And I think that's something we've heard in some of the other discussions today.

The next point is, if you don't treat others with respect, they won't treat you with respect.

This applies not only on a personal level in the daily lives of individuals, but especially when we venture out into the international arena at any level of interaction.

Respect is not something which magically appears, but rather it needs to be earned on both sides of a relationship, often through a lot of hard work amidst very difficult negotiations.

And finally, the spectrum between humility and arrogance is often similarly fraught with deep misperceptions and it's any attempts to
judge either or oneself or others.

Hereto, the idea of action speaking louder than words says a lot.

So to sum things up, I'd like to come back to a concept hat I discussed with many of you yesterday.

If done right, the same principles of mutual respect equality and mutual benefit, which have helped countries work better together, can also have a deep positive impact on a personal level, too.

I largely attribute the accomplishment that's I've achieved in Russia during my career to practicing this simple idea, and I hope it can help you as well.

It's been great to spend time with you over the past couple of days, and I wish you all the very best as you embark upon your next steps in life.

Congratulations, and thank you.
