The initial intent for the release of these articles was a slow, weekly release of each article published under the John Galt pseudonym. 
John Galt was chosen because during the FBI’s Vault 7 investigation they labeled Mr. Schulte an extremist due to his libertarian blog from high school where he wrote about Ayn Rand, Atlas Shrugged, and opined the ideals of libertarianism; For these views a decade ago, the FBI and United States Government shamefully deemed him a threat, an extremist against the State.

The following are Schulte’s 10 articles written in December 2017 and only recently recovered and typed (older drafts were posted at one point but these are the final versions he always wanted to share. Note there may still be some copy mistakes).

https://presumptionofinnocence.net/?fbclid=IwAR3CfGjDlJwFyME7LZv7m8aXhE37xnrDjhgfzBF149ZIeaYfueS_lF-ge-g

1. Presumption of Innocence: A Petition for a Redress of Grievances
BANG! BANG! BANG!
I wake with a start. It’s still dark outside and my phone reads 5:30AM. 
BANG! BANG! BANG! I jump up and as I reach out for my door I hear it unlock, open, and immediately 10-12 men in bullet proof vests, carrying guns, and siege equipment burst into my apartment and throw me against the wall. 
“FREEZE!” they yell.
“Turn around and put your hands behind your back.” I obey every command.
They search my apartment hoping to find some contraband.
Eventually one of them grabs my clothes from the closet and tells me to get dressed.
I am not permitted to use my cell phone or do anything except dress. It’s a cold, crisp morning—no one around to witness the unusual scene taking place.
As I sit in the back of the car I wonder the true necessity of breaking into someone’s residence in the early morning with 10 armed agents who know full well that I am not a threat.
Once we reach our destination, the agents lead me around like a prized dog—they beam with pride at my enslavement.
I’m fingerprinted and my picture is taken several times throughout the morning, but eventually I’m turned over to the U.S. Marshalls at the courthouse. 
The Marshalls have a stricter protocol and in addition to the handcuffs affixed to a chain around my waist to keep my hands in front of me, my ankles are also uncomfortably cuffed as well. 
These ankle cuffs make it extremely difficult to walk forward, and so I do at a slow pace. 
I’m led to what looks like a holding area with several cells the size of a small room. 
The Marshalls remove my handcuffs, but leave the ankle shackles as they direct me into one of these cells with several other arrestees. 
There is no clock or any posted schedule so everyone just sits patiently waiting their turn.
Eventually it’s my turn and I’m led out before a magistrate judge.

2. Presumption of Innocence: A Loss of Citizenship
And so I am led back to the holding cell. 
We wait the remainder of the day until everyone has been to court. 
At the end of the night, the Marshalls herd us onto a bus and drive us from the courthouse to the detention center. 
On arrival, those of us who are new are separated so that we can complete the entry paperwork and processing and change from our street clothes to the standard prison-issue uniform. 
People are generally cordial as they reunite with old prison friends or family members who have always been in the system. 
The best advice people give is that your public “pretender” will not work on your case nor do anything on your behalf unless you specifically tell them to do so: 
You’re on your own. 
The prison eventually feeds us for the first time with sandwiches as we finalize processing. 
In addition to the uniform, you are given bedsheets (no pillow), a cup, a spork (you only get one so don’t lose it!), a toothbrush and toothpaste, a bar of soap, a towel, and a roll of toilet paper. 
Everyone enters the prison onto the temporary holding floor—one of several 120-man blocks. 
On our way up, the guard leaves us in the elevator for several minutes and two of the other inmates joke about taking off, but remind each other that it’s definitely a violation. 
I sometimes marvel at the economic ingenuity and sociological principles that dictate behavior here.
The prison monetary system is built on food from the commissary (foods and snacks that can be purchased weekly) and certain non-perishable food items that retain their intrinsic value. 
People hustle their prison trades as tailors, cooks, manufacturers of certain items, drug trade, etc. 
The biggest prison faux pas is to call someone a “bitch” or for you to “punk” someone to make them appear like a bitch. 
This will almost always lead to a confrontation if not a straight fight. 
Alphas sometimes probe for weakness, and if you don’t stand-up for yourself then that may well lead to incessant bullying where you lose food or other possessions or privileges. 
Keep in mind that many people here are convicted murderers, rapists, or potentially anything. 
Some are even facing life sentences (“lifers”) with literally nothing to lose. 
Oh, right—they won’t ask you until a month after your processing, once you sit down with the unit team, but you are actually given the option to either be put here in general population with convicted people and people accused of any crime (they make no distinction nor do they separate violent offenders) or the hole—AKA solitary confinement. 
Your choice, though. 
Another big rule to protect yourself in federal prison is to never discuss your case with anyone. 
Any detail you give people and they can and will jump on your case. 
People are vultures and will do anything to help their own situation. 
You give detail, they go to your prosecutor, give minor details you told them in combination with invented details, and now their sentencmg is reduced and you gain a conspiracy charge or a confidential informant against you on your case. 
The federal prosecutors know this happens, and that most of the time the information is bogus, but they eat it up anyway.
Anyway, we finally get settled into our cells and meet our assigned cellmate (“celly”). 
They segregate the 2-bunk cells by race. Hopefully, your celly isn’t violent, psychotic, dealing drugs, or in possession of a knife or anything. 
He is. 
Hopefully, he doesn’t get caught because ultimately, you are held responsible for what may be found in his locker or even his actions. 
As we settle in, we are given half a mattress and no pillow, enjoy! 
Pillows are actually considered contraband and are banned. 
The mattresses are either cut in half due to lack of resources or used by the inmates to make illegal pillows. 
Oh, right, speaking of a lack of resources—if you don’t have a commissary account or can’t hustle a jailhouse trade then you will likely go hungry.
You will have to rush to be at the front of the chow line, then get in the seconds line while you scarf down your meal standing up and pray there is extra, because the prison food is not only unpleasant but incredibly meager such that everyone typically pays extra for food from the commissary. 
Ah, I finally meet my new celly. 
He’s in for bank robbery. 
He’s a nice guy who’s on medication for a mental illness and is partially deaf and disabled. 
He admits to the crime as many do, but also similarly states he did it simply to get sent back to prison. 
He was starving, living on the streets with no government assistance. 
He had to make the choice to either die in the streets or commit a crime; no, not a choice as there really is no decision to be made. 
He is simply one of the many that society has completely failed. 
It was in this moment that I almost cried for the first time in prison. 
I truly, deeply felt so bad for him and the others as I looked around. 
Most were uneducated who have known nothing else than a life of crime and prison since childhood. 
What kind of life is this? 
I had been extraordinarily lucky to be born into privilege. 
I was lucky to possess the intelligence, communication skills, and determination that many here were lacking. 
The government preys upon the poor and the weak. 
It was in this moment that I realized I could not let this continue. 
I felt an incredible wave of emotion as I had an epiphany—this is my true calling in life. 
This is what I was sent here to do. 
I will bring this “justice” system crumbling to its knees.

3. Presumption of Innocence: Do You Want to Play a Game?
[Skip]

4. Presumption of Innocence: Detention is Not Punishment
Prison is not exciting.
Most people have no concept of prison.
Up until my first arrest I also had no real concept of prison or the justice system.
My motivation for writing this redress of grievances is to present the information to you, to hopefully change minds, and ultimately ignite a civil rights movement to restore these civil liberties that Congress and the courts have pilfered; we have been blind and content as our rights have eroded. 
I will step up and demand change.
I will fight for the poor and uneducated who have been nameless, forgotten victims to the system for generations. 
Will you stand by my side?
The federal detention center is the worst kind of psychological warfare imaginable. 
The immediate and most noticeable equivalents are in the architecture and the little things, the sum of which have huge effects on the psyche. 
For example, the paint everywhere is a deep, melancholy gray. 
Even the regular tiled floors are painted gray to give a poor, somber mood—why else paint the tiled floors of every cell? 
Pillows and all conveniences that we normally take for granted are banned.
They take everything from you but your spirit, attitude, and sheer will to survive. 
The facility itself is positioned such that no sunlight ever enters through the small, barred windows. 
These windows offer tantalizing views of civilization that people look out longingly. 
The cells are dimly lit and the barren, cinder block walls and open piping are so aesthetically unpleasant that it feels as if the building is unfinished. 
It’s evident that at a minimum psychologists were consulted in the design and planning for detention centers. 
What’s more is once convicted you can become a “cadre” in the same prison and are moved to another unit where you gain rights, privileges, and amenities such as increased visit time, recreational time, the ability to travel outside of prison, TVs in cells, etc. 
Anyway, our cages are 44 ft2 bathrooms for two people and consist of metal bunk beds, a metal desk and slide-out stool, lockers, toilet, sink, plastic mirror, and a small window. 
The toilets and sinks are frequently broken, partially functional, and leaky. 
The cot “mattresses” are small and frequently cut in half—we are given a single bed sheet and blanket as they blast the AC and you shiver and freeze all night long or they blast the heat and you endure unbearable heat and humidity as you lay on your cot in your underwear sweating all night long. 
Seriously, there is no in-between, no therrnostat or temperature control—it’s either torture by extreme cold or extreme heat. 
The bunk beds have no ladder to reach the top bunk and the bunks themselves are just hard metal that you can feel through the thin cots. 
There is no cleaning supplies for the cells and you must purchase your own soap and toilet paper so most people rarely or never clean their cells. 
The electrical wiring is faulty and the lights periodically go out completely. 
The few showers for the unit are all broken with no shower heads, visible black mold, and bacteria you can practically see—if you don’t purchase shower shoes you will definitely contract MRSA or some other skin-eating bacteria or disease. 
Prison is absolutely crawling with bacteria especially staphylococcus and other infectious diseases due to its disgusting state so you need to be on your A-game with hygiene: Wash your hands frequently, buy extra soap, and never touch your face. 
If you can only afford a few items from commissary then you absolutely should purchase shower shoes and soap above all else. 
Ineffective ventilation causes unsafe, contaminated air. 
In fact if your unit is lucky enough to have a washer and dryer, the dryer vents the lent and everything out into the open unit—the air is teeming with debris and particles.
When fights break out, it snows and there’s low staff, the staff have a party, or for any reason whatsoever they can institute 24-hour lockdown. 
Usually, we are just locked in our cages between 9PM-6:30AM, 3:30PM-5PM, and an additional lockdown between 9:30AM-11AM on weekends for a total of 11 hours during the week and 12 and a half on weekends. 
However, in the commonplace occurrence of a 24-hour lockdown, we’re in the cages for, you guessed it, 24 hours. 
No attorney visits, phone calls, or anything allowed during this time. 
We’re served frozen solid, expired food. 
Normally, the food is bad enough: meager portions of high-sodium, low quality, disgusting food that would be illegal to feed to your dog.
Truly, you have never tasted such sub-standard, barely edible “food”— Half the time it’s either over-cooked or still raw because like everything else in prison it’s run by the inmates. 
If you actually expect to survive you need to purchase your own food and highly-processed, unhealthy snacks from commissary. 
The orderlies, those inmates who work in each unit, are tasked with everything at the prison—cleaning, cooking, assisting counselors, etc. 
There is only one corrections officer per unit of—100-120 inmates.
Most places don’t have recreational rooms so they’ll schedule outside recreational time—but it’s 50-50 whether you actually go or not. 
Supposedly, you get three rec times per week at one hour each for a total of 3 hours of fresh air and exercise per week. 
AT MAX. 
Realistically, we end up going once per week and if it snows or is too cold—Zero. 
Zero exercise for weeks. We are caged and treated worse than regulations outline for the treatment of animals; we’d be better off on display at a zoo. 
When we’re not locked in our cages or allowed to have fresh air we can sit out in the common area so long as you are wearing the full prison uniform—the dirt brown onesie—colloquially known as the “fart suit”. 
If you aren’t weanng the uniform expect to receive a ticket or be thrown into solitary confinement.
The common area has 4 TVs that arc split between Telemundo, BET, VH1, and somctimes ESPN or E! 
That’s pretty much it—Spanish or “Love and Hip-hop”. 
The TVs have no sound as you are required to purchase a $7 radio for $50 or a $20 mp3 player for $100 at commissary and tune to a specific FM frequency to listen to the channel. 
Aside from watching TV, you can gamble in dice games, dominos, or cards—but be very careful because most people are stabbed and die from gambling; they either owe someone money or win someone’s money who doesn’t want to part with it. 
Thus, I don’t recommend gambling unless you’re prepared to fight.
Aside from the overpriced commissary that the Bureau of Prisons profits, they also provide two other monopolized, overpriced services: You are allowed 5 hours of phone usage per month in 15-minute intervals per hour—That’s 20 15-minute phone calls per month. 
That’s it. 
The phone calls are charged excessively as a single 15-minute session will cost you $3.15.
That’s $63 per month for the full 20 phone calls which was more expensive than my unlimited plan that included unlimited calling, texting, and a data plan all for $45. 
It’s extraordinary that they can do this—we literally have no choice and must pay whatever outrageous price they charge. 
They also offer TRULINCS email which is basic text-based email that inmates can send and receive with approved individuals. 
Each email is carefully scrutinized and delayed in both directions. 
Here, you are charged 5 cents per minute. 
You type an email, read an email, scroll through your inbox and 15 minutes later you’ve spent 75 cents. 
That doesn’t sound like a lot, but if you spend a conservative 30 minutes per day reading and writing emails then by the end of the month that’s $45. 
So, you’re nickel-and-dimed well over $100 per month and that’s before you even purchase any food that you need to survive or the toilet paper, soap, and other life necessities. 
It’s inconceivable that the government can accuse people of a crime, kidnap them from their homes, cage them, and then force them to pay for services where they’re the only provider. 
Not only that, but they RECORD every single call and email you write and receive. 
That’s right, even if you’re speaking to your lawyer that call and email can be used against you in the court of law so use their overpriced services with caution—Anything about your case and you can be sure they enter it into evidence at your next court appearance. 
People have been recorded admitting guilt with their attorneys or friends, discussing current and future crimes, and even directly buying or selling drugs. 
Starting to understand why prosecutors love pretrial detention so much? 
They control everything and the longer you’re here the more likely you slip up and say something or write something incriminating or even tell the wrong person some detail about your case—The longer you’re detained the probability of losing your case approaches one just as this corrupt system is designed; you have no chance. 
Oh did you want a privileged call with your lawyer? 
Sure, you can request it but it will never be approved.
The “staff” supposedly here for your benefit are literally never here. 
Are they simply overworked and assigned to every unit or are they just at home committing timecard fraud? 
Who knows? 
The end result is that no one is ever here to assist you if you need anything like a privileged phone call—you just have to wait until your attorney comes to visit you. 
Speaking of the “staff’, when they actually are here they are an incompetent, bureaucratic nightmare as you would expect from a government employee.
They will never help you even if they are here—Ask them to do something and they Instantly become agitated and complain about having to work all the time. 
Oh and the bureaucracy—I had family fill out visit forms and bring them to the prison to submit them, but the prison refused to accept them. 
You see, they must be mailed. 
They’ll come through the mail to the prison, but they can’t accept them at the prison so my family had to go back home and actually mail the forms. 
Unfortunately, they mailed them directly to me at the prison instead of to the counselor.
I tried to take them to her, but nope!
That’s not the right process. 
I had to mail the forms back and ask my family to mail them back to the prison, but send them to the counselor instead of me. 
The entire Bureau of Prisons management up to the top are just as uneducated and incapable. 
We had a scheduled prison inspection by the regional directors. 
Did they talk to the prisoners or tell us when the broken microwaves, ice machines, and hot water machine would be fixed? 
Did they inspect the cleanliness or review their own process for improvement? 
Did they scrutinize officer treatment of the prisoners? 
LOL. 
No, they forced the prisoners to repaint everything gray and checked to ensure that 
1.) Beds were made to their Nazi satisfaction; 
2.) Nothing was blocking the torture vents they used to blast us each night with extreme hot or cold; 
3.) That only 5 books were on top of the lockers and not a single book over 5; 
4.) No pictures of family or decorations of any kind were in the cell to make the torture chamber feel more like home. 
That’s it—just ensuring the torture was going on schedule. 
No updates on our rat infestation. 
In fact they refused to engage with any inmates at all. 
This was the yearly B.O.P. inspection. 
The disgusting living area, black mold, broken appliances, and non-existent counselors and unit manager were deemed in accordance with B.O.P. guidelines. 
It’s incredible.
The cadres here have more privileges than you but they are here to be punished by society. 
The corrections officers tell you that you are here to be punished. 
Yet, the courts say you are not? 
There are no first amendment rights—You can’t say or write anything without their approval; there is no freedom of speech. 
Religious services must come to you or else you don’t get to use the shared religious service hall for prayer. 
If the Catholic diocese does not send a priest then you cannot attend Catholic mass even though there is a church across the street; there is no freedom of religion. 
What about the 2nd amendment? 
LOL. 
4th? 
Your room and locker are frequently searched and your property seized at any time for any reason. 
5th? 
All your communication is monitored and everything you say will be used against you. 
6th? 
8th? 
All denied. 
The Feds even use your kids and family against you. 
When your visitors are actually approved 3 months later then you get visitation once per week for 1 hour and a maximum of 3 people. 
You are brought into a room where you are shoulder-to-shoulder with other inmates and across from your visitor. 
There is no privacy, no room, and no physical contact permitted which they vigorously enforce.
There’s no modern technology whatsoever. 
We wash our clothes by hand in the sinks or moldy showers, we use typewriters (which the BOP are likely the only remaining customers) that the BOP purchase for us to use for official correspondence with the court since computers and internet are unequivocally banned. 
There are no microwaves, ovens, ice machines, pillows, etc. 
There is no health care, dental care, or first aid. 
No hydrogen peroxide, no bandages, and no way to dress wounds or obtain medicine if sick; all we can do is what they did in the 1800s—pray. 
I was previously seeing a cardiologist for a preexisting heart defect, but I’ve been denied access to a cardiologist and my treatment has been put on-hold. 
They adjusted my medication because they did not want to pay for the drugs I needed. 
If you get sick then you’re on your own—buy soups and tea and hope your body fights it off quickly. 
If you get an open wound here, it is bound to get infected. 
Find toilet paper and use soap to keep the wound from festering—good luck. 
The Feds can do anything they want and face no repercussions. 
Finally, the worst part, legally, is the inability to meaningfully contribute to your own defense from prison—Exactly what the feds want. 
They don’t want you to challenge them. 
You are forced to use dictionaries, thesauruses, encyclopedias, and old law books. 
Sure, this was effective back in 1922, but it’s 2017. 
This is absolutely absurd and entirely unconstitutional. 
How do you take the most important and powerful resource, the internet, and deny it to the very people who actually need it most?
How could I ever find that 2016 study by Dobbiey, Goldinz, and Yang without the internet? 
How could I ever hope to find important research and case law analysis without the internet? 
I’m flying blind and denied a co-pilot. 
How could I ever hope to effectively, efficiently, and fairly fight my case when I am not permitted to participate? 
The resources of the federal government are phenomenal—on each case they have 3-5 attorneys, 10 FBI agents, an entire technical support team back at Quantico, and these are just the official contributors that I see; yet, I can’t even use the internet? 
Truly, this corrupt game is stacked substantially in their favor. 
The ease of using Google to search and instantly find relevant information in lieu of reading 10 books to find an inferior subset of the information is unmatched. 
Thus, the United States federal government denies you this vital resource.

5. Presumption of Innocence: Guilty Until Proven Wealthy
If you are rich then you can afford the top-notch O.J. representation. 
If not then you must search for an attorney to represent you. 
Oh, are you detained pretrial? 
Good luck. 
You can’t use the not even a monitored version to research lawyers for your case. 
The internet is the most vital resource available to you so of course they deny it. 
They don’t want to give you any chance to succeed—they block you at each and every possible step. 
If you can’t afford an attorney then you don’t get a choice— the court randomly assigns a CJA or a public defender to your case. 
These people can be hit-or-miss, but the private attorneys appointed by the courts are the absolute worse. 
These are people trying to make it in private practice, but are failing; they are literally the bottom of the barrel of attorneys who can’t trick anyone to pay them so they must rely on the courts to find them clients. 
While their peers and successful lawyers can get their own clients and earn $250, $500, $1000+ per hour, these court-appointed attorneys can only earn ~$150 at most per hour with a cap of $10,000 per case. 
Thus, they need to accept tons of cases to pay the bills.
But not just accept tons of clients—quickly resolve each and every case too. 
As you can see, the incentive here is to accept the most cases as possible and work the least amount possible then claim their $10,000 and move on to the next victim. 
These lawyers hate clients who want to go to trial more than the federal prosecutor and will actively work against the interests of their own clients to deliver them right to the prosecutor.
Why waste the time and effort with a single client when you can finish 15 cases in the same time? 
There is no real time to get to know you as a person or interpersonal time.
They don’t visit you. 
They don’t email you. 
They don’t work on your case or file motions unless you request them to do so.
Honestly, you’re better off working on your own case in lieu of a court-appointed lawyer especially considering the time and effort put forth—They only “negotiate” your prison sentence. 
They work with the prosecutor and agree to terms across different cases! 
That’s right—your plea may have been used for another client to plea to a lower charge or a lesser sentence. 
At the end of the day it’s all about the plea deal.
Federal public defenders are less of a death sentence than court-appointed lawyers, but it depends who you get. 
If you’re lucky you’ll find an attorney who took the job for public service and actually wants to help people. 
Just kidding, that would be a unicorn. 
Public defenders are overworked and take on many cases so they have much less time to designate to each client. 
However, unlike court-appointed attorneys they are paid on salary and have much less financial incentive to minimize time and performance on each client. 
But once again, the name of the game is the plea deal.
And so this is how every federal case goes: Arrest and arraignment. 
Lawyer assigned. 
You sit in prison for 2 months while nothing happens. 
Then there’s court where both sides briefly discuss discovery. 
Another 2 months pass, You’re ready to get out of the God-forsaken hellhole that is pretrial detention at almost any cost. 
If you are one of a few to have no co-defendants on your case then your lawyer will finally come to see you and bring you the plea deal from the prosecutor (No, your lawyer didn’t negotiate anything). 
If you have many co-defendants then they’ll keep everyone in prison a full year to try to get people to rat and turn on each other before they bring you a plea deal.
The deal you are offered is a dummy deal.
What is this “dummy plea deal”?
It simply states your charges and your guidelines and asks you to plead guilty and avoid trial in exchange for an official bribe of a 3- point deduction called “Acceptance of Responsibility”.
Yup, there is an official bribe in all these coercive plea deals that offer you a 2-3 point deduction in your guidelines for pleading guilty.
The people who suffer the most from the prison industrial complex and the incentive to incarcerate are the children and future generations. 
It’s a vicious cycle that holds the poor in a persistent state of poverty and crime. 
These children are not given equal opportunity—They begun life with a substantial roadblock that is all but impossible to overcome. 
Poverty begets crime begets poverty begets crime. 
Now compare this childhood with my own-Middle class with both parents who come from strong religious and family backgrounds. 
I grew up with heavy Importance and encouragement for education. My likes and interests were kindled. 
I was involved in every extracurricular from cub scouts to sports to band, theater, technology clubs, and college prep groups. 
My family was not wealthy, but I had the richest childhood and every opportunity for success. 
So, while my family was supporting me at basketball games and band concerts the kid born into poverty with a father in prison was already working a job or selling drugs to support his family.

6. Presumption of Innocence: Can You Afford to Be Accused?
Federal indictments against you are prohibitively expensive. 
I would not recommend the experience.
If you owned a home or had a 401k or any life savings before the indictment, you will have none of them after. 
The cost of legal defense pre-indictment will run you $30,000-50,000 conservatively. 
Additionally, the courts have ruled you are not entitled to legal defense until after you’ve been arrested. 
The cost of legal defense dunng pretrial will run you an additional $60k-$150k. 
The cost of a trial will run you from $100,000 to $250,000+.  
The total I have spent so far through pretrial is $150,000. 
I’ve also spent an additional ~$18,000 on rent and other miscellaneous expenses. 
I’ve lost my job. health insurance, friends, my reputation, and an entire year of my life—and this is only the beginning.
After some time in prison my attorney re-argued bail and I was released with the following restrictions: 24-hour home incarceration under strict pre-trial supervision, surrender all passports and agree not to obtain any new passports, avoid all contact directly or indirectly with any victims or witnesses, not possess a firearm, submit to GPS location monitoring, refrain from possessing a computer, any electronic device, or accessing the internet. 
They even went so far as to ban my Roku, Amazon echo, fitbit, and HD Homerun, but allow my Smart TV. 
It was argued that my background in the tech industry could have an impact or interfere in the case including pretrial’s ability to monitor my access. 
My understanding is the only additional condition of release that I did not get was private security detail to immediately shoot me if I violated any condition.
I was told that since I was under house incarceration that I was banned from even opening my apartment door—I could not take out the trash down the hall, use the fitness room in my apartment, use the apartment deck, shop for groceries, attend mass, or even vote in the upcoming election. 
The only reason I could leave was for court appearances or attorney visits which had to be approved at least 48 hours in advance.
The ability to leave prison was a huge improvement. 
I could finally write and call family and my attorney without restrictions. 
The big problem though is trying to figure out how to live when I can’t buy food, take out trash, or use the internet, Today, everything is done online so it’s incredibly difficult when the court specifically bans you from it. 
I can only contact my attorneys by phone, I have to schedule meetings two days in advance, I can’t see any computer-related evidence against me because most of it is too voluminous to actually print, and for the stuff we can print I have to pay to print it and then I can’t easily search it. 
I can’t do research on the law or for specifics on my case, I can’t look up my charges or research similar past cases, and in fact I actually have less access under home incarceration then I did in prison because prison offered a single terminal for the law library which provided various legal documents in electronic format. 
I am literally in the dark and relying entirely on my attorney. 
I mean, I’ve been fired and I’m banned from working so I could at least be delving into the discovery and assisting my attorney on prioritizing and deciphenng the data yet the court specifically bans me from doing so. 
All I can do each day is write notes by hand and flip through the TV while hoping and praying my attorney does a good job. 
In addition to the inability to work on my case or use minimum entertainment services such as Netflix or Amazon prime to distract me, the lack of internet forces financial constraints as well: I have to call a trustworthy individual and give them my email and password as well as logins for credit card services, my USAA login, etc. 
I need to have them pay my rent monthly on my behalf as well as credit cards and other loan payments and any other recurring payments. 
I need to make sure my bank accounts have adequate funds as well so I have to direct the liquidation of my retirement accounts and other assets to cover all my expenses.
I have to arrange to cancel my gym membership—which typically requires you to do so in person and cancel Netflix and any and all possible memberships that I can possibly think to do. 
Talking and coordinating with people is also extremely difficult because I have to explain that I cannot do this over the internet or email or text.
It’s a heavy burden for those who help you and tensions run high when I try to walk them through the various logins and maneuver sites without seeing what they are doing all the while relying on my memory from several months before I was even in prison. 
Not to mention the fact that my online security is far less reliant on passwords that can be easily stolen or intercepted, but instead on two-factor authentication and other methods which make it almost impossible for others to access any of my accounts especially considering my cell phone was confiscated. 
I have to call and cancel my various medical and dental appointments because I am no longer permitted to attend and no longer have insurance anyway. 
I have to purchase my medication out-of-pocket now and get it delivered somehow.
Oh, and since I no longer have insurance I’m now breaking the law and need to figure out how to attain insurance—but how? 
I can’t access the internet to do research or presumably sign up on the Obamacare exchanges. 
In fact, now that I am banned from working and have all these expenses, I need to figure out how to get on government assistance if I even can? 
I’ve never been on welfare or anything like that in the past, but how do I continue living if the government forced me at the point of a gun to remain in my apartment for 24-hours a day and bans me from working? 
The government has reduced a man who has been earning an honest wage and contributing to society both in taxes and charity to now beg for government assistance. 
Anyway, I’d like to research into unemployment, welfare, and Medicaid, but how can I do so? 
Can I even apply for these programs without the internet? 
The government has made me so completely helpless that J must depend on others for literally everything including all the basic necessities of life. 
I ask my attorneys how the government can do this and how people pay for this? 
They tell me that most people can’t even afford this month or two that I’ve bought myself outside prison. 
Most people can’t even post bail. 
Most people never make it this far to encounter these problems. 
What happens when I’ve sold everything and I have debt to my eyeballs and can’t take out another loan? What happens then? 
Sure, It’s a huge improvement to be out of prison but the added stress and anxiety is unbearable.
It takes a huge toll on my health too because now I can’t exercise by court order or even get any fresh air at all. 
My body aches and pains as a result and I lose weight and all the muscle I had before as at one point I worked out daily for years. 
My resting heart rate rises from a 60bpm average to over 100bpm average. 
Human beings were not meant to be confined to a 700 square foot apartment for months any more than they were meant to be confined in prison. 
I feel that something is wrong physically, but what can I do really? 
No insurance, no money, no permission to leave, and no ability to do research or try to utilize online resources. 
My physical body and psychological state-of-mind are stretched to a breaking point.
Well, at least I’m out of prison and my 8th amendment rights are no longer infringed. 
We still have issues with the 6th amendment and my ability to see evidence against me, work on my case in any context, or have a fair trial at all due to these issues.
Pretrial services can walk in my residence unannounced at any time and seize anything they deem is a violation of my conditions of release and then immediately have me remanded. 
In the description for the home detention program it specifically states that you are permitted to leave your residence for religious services. 
Under home incarceration, the program I am under, it states a 24-hour-a-day lockdown and is completely devoid of a religious services exemption. 
I am banned by law from practicing my religion.
I am prohibited from free speech—I own internet-capable devices, but I cannot have them at my residence or even use the internet to practice free speech even though I still pay for it. 
How do I communicate these notes that I’m even writing? In fact, this is the second time that I have written all this by hand. 
My first attempt was while I was in prison, but they don’t let you take anything out with you. 
It’s been several months since I’ve been out and I doubt I’ll ever see those notes again so all my writing was done in vain. 
Will anyone ever read these notes or know what I have gone through?
But, I can’t type these notes. 
I can’t contact the Washington Post or New York Times to see if they would be  interested—and who knows if they would even care? 
I’m sure there are some organizations out there who may care, but I don’t know anything about them. 
I can’t do my own research and see if someone like me has already published something like this to no avail. 
No, I’m sure all of this is just a mental errand. It’s just a way that I keep sane. 
I have to tell someone my plight because I can’t stand the injustice of it all and so this notebook will do. 
I’m not even a writer anyway and I’m sure this is all hot garbage and unprintable. 
The last time I wrote a paper longer than a couple pages was most likely high school English. 
I can’t even send this or some scaled down version to my congressional representative or Senator to beg for help not that they would likely do anything since Congress is exactly why I’m in this predicament. 
Nope, I’m still helpless, hopeless, and completely alone. 

7. Presumption of Innocence: A Proposed Solution
Abolishment of bail. 
Every American citizen accused of a crime has a presumption of innocence and therefore cannot be incarcerated unless convicted of a crime. 
No exceptions.
Release conditions such as surrendering passports, GPS monitoring, and restricted travel can be applied to people accused of a violent crime or those who have previously evaded court. 
Strict home incarceration can only be applied in the most extreme of circumstances where someone has been accused of mass murder or acts of terror which would call their mental state into question, but all costs must be covered by the government.
No mandatory sentencing requirements are constitutional.
We should be able to immediately view any evidence presented for probable cause and be able to challenge it in court. 
It should not be acceptable that evidence is kept until right before trial.
Any and all warrants Including for search and seizure can be immediately challenged in court and the probable cause and all evidence used to assert probable cause is immediately discoverable. 
The good faith exception to the exclusionary rule is rejected; if the judge finds that probable cause did not exist and/or that he would not have approved the warrant then the warrant must be immediately thrown out. 
The government must promptly turn over all evidence collected in federal cases.
The prosecution no longer has the discretion of determining what can be turned over—All evidence including notes by the prosecutors and police officers must be handed over. 
Additionally, all prosecutors, judges, and law enforcement have no immunity from civil litigation or criminal prosecution; All must be held responsible for any malfeasance or other misconduct and no one can hide behind a shield of immunity from justice.
The government must pay all expenses incurred during a criminal trial excluding any outside attorney, but including the necessary hiring of experts. 
If arrest results in firing then the government must pay the individual what his wages would have been including benefits such as health insurance, etc. 
If the case is thrown out or the accused is found not-guilty on all charges then he must be entirely compensated for all expenses including outside attorneys and his time.
Ban all individuals with law degrees and bar certifications from public office. 
Federal prosecutors are ineligible for judgeship until 5 active years of defending clients in criminal cases. 
All elected officials are henceforth limited to 2-terms.
There is no longer any age restriction for eligibility of elected offices.
All convened Grand Juries decline all indictments
All juries utilize jury nullification in trials where defendants have been denied these liberties including pretrial detention, charges resulting in mandatory sentences, questionable warrants, and absurd prison sentence guidelines.

8. Presumption of Innocence: Origins
My case involves WikiLeaks and the Vault 7/8 release. 
I worked for the National Security Agency and then the Central Intelligence Agency up through the end of 2016. 
I was one of the CIA's top engineers responsible for developing malware and other software and hardware solutions targeting adversaries across the world in an effort to protect U.S. interests and gather meaningful intelligence for the policymakers in Washington. I enjoyed my work and considered serving my country as a great and humbling honor. 
I joined the CIA because of 9/11—the day of infamy for our generation. I was only in the 7th grade at the time, but my heart beat in unison with America; I felt the powerful emotion it evoked as the United States came together like never before. 
As a proud and patriotic Texan, I wanted to avenge my country. 
Nearly 10 years later I had the chance as I was able to play my part in an operation to verify UBC’s location that ultimately led to his demise and justice for the thousands of victims from that fateful day. 
I continued to hunt down terrorists and prevent planned tenorist attacks against the United States and her allies.
Unfortunately, this was disrupted by incompetent management and bureaucracy is as common in the federal government. 
My fellow developers and operators were generally successful despite management’s best efforts to derail and disrupt our work with meaningless process, nonsensical directives, a lack of leadership, and incoherent babble and buzzwords that only confirmed our suspicions that management literally had no idea or understanding of what we did and therefore could not possibly lead us. 
Engineering and technology had never really been understood by the Agency. 
In fact, before I transferred to the CIA, my NSA colleagues would often criticize and disparage the CIA as the “Clowns in Action”, the “Northern Virginia Check Dispensary’, or even mocked as the 23rd best intelligence agency in the WDC area. 
Unfortunately, the Agency along with many federal agencies employ the largest share of mouth breathers of any equivalently-sized Fortune 500 company and these people typically get “promoted out of the problem” all the way to the top since it is impossible to fire anyone within the government. 
This incompetence, however, sometimes puts national security in jeopardy.
I reported numerous security vulnerabilities that I discovered within our network and particularly issues with system administration, backup, and protection of some of our prominent tool sets. 
I was continually met with pushback and retaliatory responses that ultimately forced me to resign. 
My final acts were to file complaints with the OIG and the House Select Committee on Intelligence to hopefully prevent future retaliatory actions against others.
Although I was sad to leave the CIA’s mission behind, I had high hopes for my future. 
I moved to the great New York City to work for a prestigious software company [Bloomberg]. 
The work, management, and leadership at this new company were in stark contrast to the government: Highly intelligent and motivated people from diverse backgrounds all working in seamless harmony.
It was a wonderful experience and superb work environment. 
My future plans were to work for this company for several years while living in illustrious Manhattan while building up my own business. 
As I left the Agency I recognized a gaping hole existed for computer/network security expertise. 
How many companies have been victims of attacks that have compromised client and customer data? 
Dating back to the Sony hacks, Target, etc. 
There was a clear lack of understanding from CEOs how to adequately secure private data. 
I assume most simply did not want to pay the security costs that the CTOs and others were quoting which ultimately led to significantly increased costs not only directly but also in loss to reputation and future business.
Instead of delaying costs needed to secure network and data from hostile attacks both from possible state actors and criminal organizations alike, they needed to act quickly. 
I saw this need of direction and consulting as an excellent business opportunity from someone very familiar from the offensive side. 
I believed that I could leverage my experience and expertise with software architecture, development, and deployment of malware along with my networking and system administration skill set to provide a unique knowledge and opportunity to the economy. 
I already had a massive server that I ran to provide services and share with other like-minded developers across the world.
I originally set up my server as a hobby in high school and it eventually grew in scale from the first Mandriva and Slackware servers to an entire server rack running various VMS with massive storage potential exceeding 50 TB and incredible processing power. 
I loved my association with the open source movement and often spent my own time reverse engineering proprietary software to release open source projects to compete. I participated in folding@home, storage@home, TOR, bitcoin mining, and other distributed computing projects to contribute what little I could for the hopes of a better world.
In my youth I was moved by the literature of Ray Kurzweil: The man is right — Technology is advancing exponentially as we approach the Singularity — the merger of humanity with technology and our transcendence of biology and the corresponding limits it imposes. 
We have already rendered natural selection inert, “survival of the fittest” deprecated, and soon we will possess the technology to evolve at will as we achieve immortality.
No, this isn’t science fiction. 
Kurzweil inspired me to become a computer engineer in the first place and I always hoped to play a pivotal role in overseeing the emergence of the revolutionary technology that will inevitably empower our species to transform energy into information and flood the cosmos with our intelligence. 
I loved the world of technology, engineering, and innovation and I hoped to participate in as many different groups as possible and to meet as many people as possible. 
At my peak, I had 50-100+ different users utilizing my servers for all kinds of different activities from storage space to development, reverse engineering, gaming, etc.
The sky was the limit for my hopes, dreams, and aspirations.
On March 7th 201 7, WikiLeaks unveiled “"Vault 7" which were classified documents from my old group’s internal development network. 
I was the only one to have recently departed this group on poor terms while disclosing vulnerabilities in the system all the while planning to visit Cancun with my brother during Spring Break in the following week. 
Due to these unfortunate coincidences the FBI ultimately made a snap Judgement that I was guilty of the leaks and targeted me. 
The FBI illegally, with malicious intent and blatant disregard for the truth, filed a broad search warrant for all electronic devices at my new residence in New York City. 
It did not matter that in the year that elapsed since the alleged commission of the crime, I had purchased and/or reconfigured all my devices as I do yearly due to Moore’s law; it did not matter that they did not specifically know of any electronic devices or specify any particular server, desktop, or phone in my apartment, but instead simply stated "most people have electronic devices so we suspect he does too, and we want them all."
It did not matter that the search warrant provided no direct evidence of my involvement and in fact no evidence at all that linked my house in Virginia at the time or any of my devices to the alleged crime.
In fact, it did not matter that ALL the probable cause used against me was ENTIRELY WRONG and direct fabrications that the FBI themselves acknowledged in subsequent search warrants which all refuted the initial probable cause. 
The FBI set an artificial and misguided deadline on the night before I was to depart NYC for Cancun to prevent me from leaving the country. 
Despite my insistence with them that the notion someone would flee the country AFTER the publication literally made no sense—if it were me communicating with WikiLeaks then obviously I would have made damn sure to leave BEFORE it happened—they were persistent in their belief that I was guilty. 
The FBI literally told me that everyone "up to the top" knew we were having this conversation and that "they" could not afford to let me leave the country. 
"They" could not afford another national embarrassment like Snowden. 
"They" would not, under any circumstances, allow me to leave the country. 
The FBI were prepared and willing to do anything and everything to prevent me from leaving the country including threaten my immediate arrest arrest unless I surrendered my passport.
I did NOT initially consent, but the FBI held me against my will without any arrest warrant and even actively disrupted my attempts to contact an attomey. 
Intimidated, fearful, and without counsel, I eventually consented. 
I was immediately suspended from work and spent the next 6 months assisting the FBI in their investigation through various proffer sessions while they intimidated, harassed, and deceived all those close to me until soon only my family remained at my side. 
Despite my honest and forthright cooperation that undoubtedly put their investigation on track for the first time, the FBI dispatched a horde of agents to intimidate and threaten every person I ever knew, including my entire family in Texas. 
The FBI shamefully told my mother that they found an extremist conservative blog I wrote in high school that exemplified my anti-government sentiment. 
The Libertarian blog ironically discussed the dangers of Big Brother and the federal government’s unrelenting encroachment of civil liberties. 
I quoted George Orwell’s 1984 and Ayn Rand’s Atlas Shrugged (hence the deviation of my pseudonym, John Galt).
At some point the FBI realized their mistake and submit multiple additional search warrants with a revised set of probable cause taken from subpoenas that used probable cause obtained from the first search warrant. 
What did these new search warrants say? 
They stated that the initial probable cause was actually all entirely wrong, but they tried their hardest in their attempts to obtain it so the warrant is still legal.
The FBI’s incompetence and wrongful accusations against a CIA intelligence officer are reminiscent of the Hanson investigation. 
There, too, the FBI wrongfully accused a CIA officer of espionage and they destroyed his entire life due to these accusations alone.
The FBI unethically, immorally, deceptively, and illegally task my former mentor to fly up from South Carolina to meet me without my attorneys and proceed to attempt to coerce a confession from me while wearing a wire.
My lawyers and I respond by starting a conversation with the Associated Press. 
The FBI arrest me shortly thereafter.
I’m arrested and charged with a crime that had nothing to do with the initial search warrant and that I was completely innocent. 
The U.S. Attorney unethically and immorally misleads the court regarding what the initial investigation was about, when they found the illicit materials, and the fact that they did not think I was involved for 5 months until their initial investigation came up empty.
I’m denied bail and thrown into prison immediately and they use the situation as leverage telling my attorney every day that he can make this huge embarrassment and misunderstanding all go away if only I would agree to cooperate on the WikiLeaks investigation and admit to it. 
They admit, unabashedly that these entire charges are nothing more than a ruse, an attempt at leverage to break me.
If the FBI had actually reviewed my security file at the CIA, not only would they find successful background investigations and polygraphs, but also my psychological evaluation which consists of the following vices: arrogance and extreme self-confidence, unrelenting determination, and righteous indignation. 
I have been arrested for not adequately policing my servers enough to detect and destroy illicit materials. 
I am arrested as a small business owner and entrepreneur who ran a complex network of many servers, desktops, VMS, and backups across multiple subnets of which only 0.097% of the data was found to be illicit. 
The remaining 99.9% were used for good. 
Since I owned the servers, and as they would argue, I also owned the data and therefore was criminally liable.
Speaking of unprecedented, what about the incredible counter intelligence and national security implications? 
The FBI, in all its brilliance, has just taken a senior techmcal intelligence officer in the highest echelon of the American Intelligence Community and highest security clearance with intimate knowledge of the NSA, CIA, and all projects and operations he’s worked and assisted, including the names of assets, specifics of covert action authorized by President Barack Obama, NIPF priorities, current and future targets, vulnerabilities in intelligence networks as previously reported, names of intelligence secrets, SIGINT operations and the locations of sensitive collection equipment within the United States and around the world, military secrets and contingency plans, and an eidetic memory to boot and they have arrested him for a crime they know he did not commit to use it as leverage in a crime where they incorrectly believe he has already leaked classified information. 
Hmmm. 
Does that sound like the most intelligent move, really? 

9. Presumption of Innocence: The Devil’s Dishonest, Deplorable, Diabolically Demented Demons
"Let’s go, get up."
"Come on, you’re going to jail." 
Wha?
Is this another nightmare? 
I’ve had torturous dreams and trouble sleeping ever since my arrest and immediate remand into federal prison. 
I look around as 5 police officers stand in my apartment. 
The clock reads 5:30 AM.
"Get dressed. We’re taking you to jail."
I start to get up and dress—still groggy and in complete disbelief that this is somehow happening AGAIN. 
I confusedly say, “But I’m under house incarceration What in the world am I getting arrested for?”
"It doesn’t matter," they respond.
I ask to see the warrant as I’m sure there’s been a mistake, but they refuse. 
They handcuff me and lead me, once again, in the abyss at the point of a gun. 
I was nearing completion with my “Presumption of Innocence: Redress of Grievances” and only had #5 and #8 to complete and edit. 
In fact, my notebook containing them was sitting on my table as I had intended to spend that day finalizing them for publication. 
Coincidentally, this was the second time that I was nearing a press release and subsequently was arrested.
The police take me to the nearest precinct in Manhattan and process me. 
I heard them talking confusedly and trying to figure out what to do next. 
Eventually they tell me the arrest warrant is from Virginia and that I’ve been arrested as a fugitive from justice. 
I ask the officer the charges and what happens next, but he doesn’t know. 
They finish processing me and then take me outside the federal courthouse around 6:30 AM. 
I’m told we are waiting for pretrial services to remove my ankle bracelet before they can take me into the state courthouse. 
Great. 
As we sit there, I start to bond with the NYPD—they’re very professional and I understand that they’re doing their job—likewise, they see my respect, attitude, and general demeanor and they open up a bit about what’s going on: They confess how unusual the entire situation is. 
They tell me that never in all their years of experience have they ever had something like this happen.
Apparently, Virginia filed an arrest warrant back in November, but the NYPD never did anything with it until the FBI called them and specifically told them to execute it today. 
Strange...
What the hell is going on? 
We wait outside as the police call back-and-forth between themselves and pretrial services trying to figure out how and when to get someone to come down and remove my ankle bracelet. 
Finally, after 9 AM, my pretrial services officer comes by and removes the bracelet while also commenting on the atypical situation.
The police then take me to the state courthouse where I’m processed once again and led into a holding cell with other arrestees as we await bail.
A few hours in the cell and my new lawyer comes by to explain what is going on—he has only just officially taken on my case as my last lawyer abandoned my case when he left the firm.
Anyway, when I was initially arrested back in August, the FBI alleged in my bail hearing that I sexually assaulted a colleague that I worked with, lived with, and dated for a time. 
They incredulously claimed that they found pictures from my devices over 5-6 months ago that allegedly showed my sexually assaulting her 2+ years ago. 
However. when they interviewed her, she did not cooperate with their investigation, nor did she claim that I ever hurt her and that she did NOT want to press charges. 
This was a person I cared for and even loved very much, I never ever would have hurt her and she knows this.
Even after our fling of a relationship ended, we remained very close I considered her my best friend and she mine—up until the FBI began to harass and intimidate her and she sent me that final text last March that she was no longer allowed to contact me. 
And that’s how our special relationship ended. 
I was heart-broken. 
And now to claim I sexually assaulted her? I can’t even bear it.
Anyway, initially the judge said he would not even consider these outrageous allegations in my bail determination (but found me guilty and threw me in prison nonetheless). 
Despite this dismissal, they once again attempted to bring it up in my second bail hearing, and once again, the judge dismissed it.
Our belief at the time was that this was just another dishonest, dirty trick to lie and taint my image to subconsciously influence the judge. 
My prosecutor, the ROACH, was particularly adept at lying and manipulation. 
However, apparently after my second bail hearing when I was released on literally every possible restriction, the FBI and the ROACH contacted Virginia and actually directed the District Attorney to file charges and prosecute me so they could violate me on my bail and take me back to federal prison. 
THE. 
DAY. 
AFTER. 
MY. 
RELEASE. 
The FBI had this “evidence” for almost an ENTIRE YEAR, but only forwarded it to the state as a malevolent and depraved strategy: Even though the charges were bogus and would NEVER hold up in a court of law, it was enough to send me back to prison. 
Incredibly, the alleged victim was STILL not cooperating and still vehemently opposed pressing charges against me.
But since when has the FBI or the Feds ever cared about a victim? 
They don’t give a shit about her. 
Let me repeat that: The FBI obviously couldn’t care less about her at all. 
Otherwise, why wait a year to forward it to Virginia? 
Why file charges when she expressly doesn’t want any charges? 
Because they are ruthless, soulless demons who simply want to use her to destroy me. 
She’s a tool to be used at their disposal nothing more than a meaningless pawn in their sadistic game.
They don’t care about her or finding the truth—only what deceitful lies they can weave before the court to have me rot in prison. 
Incredulously, although the Feds failed in their incessant intimidation to coerce her into filling charges against me (yes, multiple attempts involving disgusting lies that they told her), they still pushed forward and demanded the Virginia District Attorney to press charges WITHOUT her consent or cooperation. 
What were the terms of the maleficent quid pro quo between the ROACH and the Virginia DA? 
But that’s not all we learn the ROACH had previously approved for me to travel into the city for Thanksgiving With my family. 
My family booked travel arrangements and planned outings to a Knicks game, a musical, comedy show. etc during the week of Thanksgiving. 
Honestly. I never should have been under house incarceration in the first place, but traveling with my family should have nullified my “danger to society”. 
Alas, it was too good to be true once my family arrived, the ROACH called and gleefully rescinded the exemption.
No, I would not be permitted to disregard the unconstitutional conditions imposed by the court for Thanksgiving. 
The ROACH is the very personification of pure evil—soulless demons sent from the pits of hell to torture and afflict good people. 
But we already knew this—it was the reason that we finally discovered. Yes. the reason he set up my family to come visit with me in NYC and then rescind was because he is pure, 100% evil; but so much more than that—not only did he purposefully rescind the exemption as to steal Christmas from a child, but he also unconscionably planned for the police to arrest me and drag me from my apartment from my apartment on Thanksgiving WHILE my family was in town.
All this time so he could showcase his power as the demented United States Attorney that he was; indeed a true diabolical scheme that we never saw coming. 
Unfortunately for him, it did not work out as planned and instead took the police several weeks to execute the arrest warrant.
Normally, Virginia would have never filed bogus charges. 
Normally, the AUSA would contact my attorney regarding the charges so we could handle them without any fugitive arrests necessary. 
ut this isn’t a normal case—ROACH is hoping to base his political career off my murder. 
And so, although I’m under every possible inhumane bail restriction including 24-hours house incarceration, I’m still arrested and labeled a FUGITIVE for a non-existent crime that allegedly happened 2 years ago on an arrest warrant that was purposefully hidden from my legal team, and based on “evidence” originally discovered 6 months ago but never sent to Virginia until now, and a victim who denies the charges and is not cooperating. 
The ROACH and the FBI absolutely hated every second I was out on bail despite the unlivable conditions. 
They even told my attorney that they wanted me back in prison WHERE I BELONGED and that they would do anything to accomplish it. 
Isn’t that incredible?
At the time, we thought they were just salty that I was permitted one small liberty instead of denied all permanently in prison. 
We were in the process of finalizing requests with the court to get computer/lnternet access as well as move me back to my home country of Texas since I was not bankrupt and could no longer afford my rent. 
The ROACH denied our request and said that they would argue against it in court, but we were optimistic that we would win and I would be home with my family for Christmas despite the demons’ best efforts. 
However, instead of arguing for my return home we were once again arguing for my freedom and potentially which prison I would spend Christmas. 
In addition to the ROACH arguing that I broke my bail conditions due to the “new” arrest that they constructed, I learn that they also clam I broke my bail conditions by accessing the Intemet. 
They file a letter with the court. which was clearly already prepared, that contained blatant lies, deception, and fallacious arguments just like their search warrant and vindictive indictment. 
They outright lie to the court and clam that Virginia DA “found additional evidence” linking me to the crime—the DA told my attorney that the only evidence they had was what the FBI gave them.
So, who is lying? 
Is the court not concerned that there IS a liar in their midst? 
Not really. 
Nope. 
Additionally, the letter mentions Internet access based on Google account login data they obtained from Google without a warrant as well as IP addresses they clam indicate TOR access that they obtained from my ISP, Verizon, also without a search warrant. 
So, first of all, apparently the FBI can subpoena and receive information about your Google account without a search warrant and they can sniff your Internet traffic and obtain information about your web traffic from Verizon without a search warrant. 
Police State, anyone?
The web traffic and other evidence submitted to the court failed to mention a minor detail—my cousin moved in with me to assist me with life necessities such as purchasing food and groceries, throwing out the trash, picking up the mail, oh and paying bills and handling communication for me. 
My cousin even signed an affidavit and received approval from pretrial services. 
Pretrial services came to my apartment and approved the Verizon router and Internet I still paid so that my cousin could use it. 
OH, additionally I wanted to be on the safe side so I SPECIFICALLY asked pretrial services if my cousin could login and handle my affairs such as rent we had to pay, credit card bills, correspondence and maintenance of my property and tenants in Virginia, correspondence with my apartment managers and super, printing emails for me, etc and they gave consent. 
My cousin also, separately, asked and ALSO received their consent. 
Yet, that isn’t mentioned at all, because in the upside-down of the American justice system, facts and truths simply don’t matter. 
So, the FBI snooped on a private citizen, my cousin, stole his Internet traffic data and claimed it was me without any proof whatsoever. 
The ROACH’s letter to the court doesn’t even mention the fact that my cousin lived with me, let alone had a signed affidavit for his laptop and was authorized to access the Intemet.
Furthermore, my attorney reached out to them to tell them these obvious facts. 
They responded saying, "Oh yeah, that’s exactly what we thought you’d say!" 
Um, yes we were planning to use the truth? 
But nice work on the prediction? 
This conversation underscores that not only did they know my cousin lived with me and was authorized, but they clearly knew he was the one accessing the Internet but intentionally left him out of their ENTIRE letter to deceive the court. 
They also intimidated pretrial services into stating that he did not intend to give such “carte blanche authorization” for my cousin to handle my affairs indefinitely and that it was a misunderstanding (but still acknowledged our requests AND his subsequent approval!). 
Do you need ANY more evidence that the FBI and the ROACH are actively and maliciously lying and deceiving the judge for the sole purpose of denying me the last civil liberty I had left—my...freedom? 
I finish speaking with my attorney and then I’m led back to the holding pen as I await my turn before tho judge.
The judge orders me remanded into state custody since I am a “fugitive on arrest” (FOA).
Once again, despite my innocence and STILL zero convictions, I am ordered into prison at the point ot a gun.
I am unable to travel to Virginia myself to handlo these outrageous allegations.
Instead, I must rot in prison for 2 weeks as the FBI cheer and pat each other on the back for a job well-done. 
Surely, J. Edgar Hoover would beam with pride at the guileful way his agents circumvented the law and manipulated the system to throw an innocent man in prison; no doubt there was no coincidence that I’m arrested on the same day the ROACH sends a letter to the court claiming I violated my bail conditions.
No, it’s the double whammy effect to overwhelm the judge against me exactly as they planned from the very first day I was released on bail. 
And so finally I’m brought to the second prison I’ve ever been, the first in the state system to await intake.
The conditions of the state prison system are horrid and appalling beyond belief. 
I’m thrown into a pen the size of a small room with about 12 other guys. There’s not even enough room for all of us to sit on the concrete benches along the walls. 
The toiled in the back is broken and covered in feces, as is the entire surrounding area. 
There are used food trays littered and strewn about the floor haphazardly and it looks as if it hasn’t been cleaned in weeks, or even months. 
There are actual gnats, roaches, and various beetles everywhere. 
The unsanitary conditions are something from a foreign prison horror flick, but this is downtown Manhattan.
The air itself is so rancid that it’s hardly even breathable there’s no AC or filter for the air either. We sit, stand, lay across the floor, and try to tolerate these conditions for 16 full hours before processing even BEGINS. 
No words currently exist in the English language to actually describe what it’s like to sit in this hellhole for 16 straight hours. 
People start to bang on the walls and door and shout like animals just to get an officer’s attention to get basic needs fulfilled. 
They forget to feed us and we continually yell about the broken, disgusting toilet because people need to use It—it’s not fixed for 6 hours and then they don’t even clean it. 
They don’t bring us water for nearly 8 hours and neglect every need until we bang like animals. 
They even refused to let a guy out who was so sick from the disgusting environment that he was gagging, about to throw up, and yelling for medical. 
No one came. 
No one cared.
God forbid if anyone had a heart attack—they’d die right there in the cell. 
We were sleep deprived by the 24-hour bright lights and denied beds that night—forced to sleep with the roaches on the dirty, smelly, cold, hard floor without even the ability to lay down—there were too many of us and not enough floor. 
And so we sat up all night long until medical arrived at 9 AM to start that part of the intake process. 
It fook, in total, 40 hours—a full work week—to get a cell and a bed from the first time arriving at the Manhattan Detention Center. 
And I was a lucky one as most people took at least 2 full days if not well over 3 days for the entire intake process. 
The tombs we were assigned were also heavily roach-infested and they scurried across my face and in my bed throughout the night. 
That first night was also the first snowfall of the year, but I was denied a blanket so I laid shivering in the fetal position all night long exhausted, but unable to sleep and ready for death to take me.
Due to these dreadful conditions including the awful food, broken showers that required you to press and hold a button for either freezing cold or burning hot water, roach infestation, and extremely violent individuals (fights breaking out almost every hour), the federal prison system was better. 
Well, the state system was simply closer to actual hell, a much larger infinity-magnitude; it was the real numbers infinity compared to the integers infinity—both prison systems asymptotically approaching hell, but one clearly much closer. 
Anyway, since I had to spend a week in the state system then go to federal court to defend against the prosecutor’s allegations that I violated my bail conditions, then spend another week in prison regardless before I was brought to Virginia for arraignment and bail there, my legal team decided that it would be better to CONSENT to federal remand on the conditions that I would be brought down to Virginia the following week, then return immediately to argue bail in federal court WITHOUT the whole sexual assault charges looming over me. 
Phew. 
Got all that? 
Basically, the Feds were doing anything and everything to keep me in prison exactly as they told us: I must now hire another attorney in Virginia and have two simultaneous cases against me, both of which seeking to deny me bail and remand me throughout trial—a process that could easily take 2-3 years each. 
Two cases. 
Two jurisdictions. 
Two lawyers. 
Two bail hearings. 
Great.
So there are 4 possible outcomes:
00 — Lose in state court and get remanded; Lose in federal court and get remanded; RESULT: REMAND
01 — Lose in state court and get remanded; Win in federal court; RESULT: REMAND
10 — Win in state court; Lose in federal court and get remanded; RESULT: REMAND
11 — Win in both and get released on excessive bail with harsh, unlivable conditions; RESULT: FREEDOM
So, the following week I’m taken to federal court in chains where we consent to remand without prejudice on the condition that the Feds allow me to go to Virginia and take care of that case first. 
And so I was turned back over the Marshalls and processed back into the federal system where I was transferred to a third person: 3 different prisons now in the span of 3 months—still ZERO convictions. 
The next week came and passed. 
The Virginia authorities were scheduled to pick me up on the 19th for my scheduled court date on the 21st. 
No one came—I missed the Virginia court appearance. 
What happened? 
Everything was arranged, the paperwork signed, and the authorities set to pick me up. 
Take a guess what happened: the conniving, diabolical ROACH. 
ROACH. 
He did roach-Ilke things.
He called the Virginia District Attorney and directly intervened to cancel the pickup and dictate to Virginia that they file a detainer against me instead. 
This evil ploy assured that I would not be deadlocked—Declared a danger to society because of the Virginia arrest on sexual assault, but unable to address this ridiculous, underlying issue because the Feds declared me a danger to society and had me remanded.
So, I would be in federal prison because of a state charge that I was unable to fight because I was in federal prison. 
Outplayed again by deceptive liars who never intended to allow me to address the state issues as they knew it would be thrown out, Dishonorable demons Who had me set up from the get go, who circumvented a judge’s order to grant me bail from the very first day I left prison: Recall that the FBI setup the Virginia arrest the day I left prison; they knew my cousin was accessing my email and paying my bills because we had it approved by pretrial services. 
Thus, they malevolently setup and planned to deceived a federal judge just so they could strut their power and laugh menacingly as an innocent American patriot who hunted down terrorists and served his country honorably was dishonorably thrown in prison and tortured by this very same country he served. 
Forget the worthless Mueller investigation, the United States must immediately call a special counsel to investigate the FBI and federal prosecutors in this vindictive, maleficent handling of my case as well as others it’s incredibly disturbing that these people are operating with no supervision or accountability; the FBI must be entirely dissolved.
And so, due to this unspeakable evil, I was unable to spend Christmas in Texas with my family, but instead, in federal prison presumed guilty of a crime that I never committed. Don’t ever take your freedom for granted—hold loved ones close and cherish your precious time together; not only could they fall victim to some unpreventable tragedy or illness this time next year, but they may well fall victim to Big Brother Presumed guilty and tortured by the Police State. Be wary should you fall into the crosshairs of the vindictive federal government as they will unleash unlimited resources to crucify you.
To add insult to injury, the FBI also contacted my new federal prison and directed the warden to disable my TRULINCS email access. 
I had this access at the first federal prison and for several weeks at this new prison, up until I sent an email via TRULINCS to my lawyer commenting on the irony of now having more civil liberties in prison that I did under house incarceration. 
The next day my account was disabled. The FBI (or is it the KGB?) make no attempts to conceal their dirty, dishonorable tricks. 
And why should they? 
They’ve treated people like this for decades with impunity. 
And so now with my TRULINCS disabled, I had less access and rights in federal prison than murderers, rapists, and most ironically, terrorists.
The bail argument in federal court was a decisive loss. 
The ROACH lies and argues that Virginia found new evidence proving I’m guilty of the sexual assault despite the fact that the Virginia District Attorney tells my attorney that no, still all they have is what the FBI sent them, along with the directive to prosecute me. 
But, federal prosecutors are permitted to lie to a federal judge. 
In fact, the ludicrous idea of arguing a Virginia case in New York federal court on hearsay alone doesn’t even phase the judge he concurs with the ROACH that I am guilty of everything. 
The ROACH argues I violated my bail conditions, and this 300-year-old judge, who almost certainly dislikes the Internet and technology in general, and who definitely does not understand the most basic concept of modern technology (as his only experience is through his jitterbug phone), unequivocally rules that I clearly violated bail ipse dixit. 
Throughout my attorney’s argument, the judge actually makes snide comments and openly mocks hirm his bias.
It couldn’t have been clearer from the moment we stepped into the courtroom. 
He had his mind made up and there was nothing we could do or say.
We had no chance. 
Incredulously, despite my attorney’s urging to ask pretrial services about our conversations, the judge blatantly refuses! 
The man’s Sitting right there and will tell you that we asked and he granted permission for my cousin to access the Internet (although, of course, he claims it was a misunderstanding and he didn’t intend to give us such carte blanche access, but there was clear effort to abide by the judge’s ruling nonetheless). 
Nope, the fix was in. 
The old white man was unfit to judge anyone fairly and held a clear bias. 
This is the American justice system. 
The federal prosecutor is all-powerful and need only whisper in the ear of his colleague, the judge, for everything to go his way.
And so I was directed to federal prison for the remainder of my case up through trial  the official determination of my guilt or innocence—in federal prison presumed guilty. 
The crime that landed me in indefinite incarceration in America? 
Asking my cousin to pay the bills and Google “pretrial detention case law” whenever he gets a chance for my “Presumption of Innocence: Redress of Grievances”. 
Not only that, but my lawyer must obtain a security clearance to see the discovery, that, 5 months after my arrest I still haven’t seen for my case. 
I have no right to a speedy trial due to issues of national security and I must now wait 6-9+ months in federal prison for my attorney to obtain a security clearance before I can even start on my case. American justice at its finest.
Finally, I’m going to end this article with an early experience I had in this third federal prison, MCC, which I sent the warden.
I never received any reply. 
I’ve realized that the Feds not only block Internet access here to prohibit us from assisting in our own cases, but also to raise an iron curtain across its inhumane prison system. 
Why do tyrannical governments ban Internet access from its citizens? 
One, to keep them ignorant of the outside world; and two, to prevent its citizens from unmasking the government’s facade. 
The Feds ban Internet access for the latter—can you imagine what would happen if tortured slaves tweeted from prison? 
“Yeah, the c/o just beat George senseless again for asking how many days until they feed us. LOL. #TheLifeOfASlave #AnotherDayAtMCC”. 
Their days of doing whatever they want without recourse, accountability, or punishment would end abruptly. So, obviously, forbid the slaves from free speech. 
In fact, let’s monitor all communication from prison and actively block anything negative about us. 
Anyway, here’s what happened to me at MCC:
As I was getting ready for bed after lockdown one night, I fell and cut my hand on my locker. 
There are no ladders for the upper bunk and traversing can sometimes be dangerous. 
I put pressure on my wound to stop the bleeding, but to no avail. 
Around 10:15 PM, I started pounding on my cell door for the C/O—Note, there is no other way to contact the C/O once we’re locked in our cages except to make noise and hope they hear. 
Once again, if you have a heart attack or something and can’t make noise then you will die here. 
The C/O eventually came around and I showed him my hand and told him that I’d been bleeding for 30 minutes and it won’t stop.
I simply requested some basic first aid that should very easily be accessible in the United States.
The officer claimed there was no first aid kit at all in the unit or ANY available medical assistance, but that he would call it in and return with help.
He never came back.
Around 11:00 PM, I began banging on the door again. This time he did not come at all. 
There was blood all over my cell, in the sink, the toilet, and no indication of it stopping any time soon. 
The officer didn’t know anything about my medical condition—my congenital heart defect and the blood thinners I had been on that inhibit the body’s natural blood clotting functionality to lower my high blood pressure — so I was legitimately concerned and needed medical assistance. 
Incredulously, the officer continued to ignore me after 15 minutes of loud banging so I began kicking the door and yelling so loudly that the entire tier woke up and began calling for the C/O as well. 
It is so degrading and humiliating to resort to such primal, animalistic behavior for self-preservation, but when you are thrust in a situation your will to survive kicks in and takes over—yet, this isn’t a lion chasing me, but a deep gash in my hand while locked helplessly in a cage. 
Recall that, once again, I have never been convicted of a crime (l just really can’t stress that enough), and yet I am treated as if I have no basic human rights no right to medical aid or assistance; no right to life. 
It took another 20 minutes for the officer to respond. 
20 minutes of humiliating door-kicking and yelling just to get the officer’s attention. When he finally did respond, he was visibly upset and irritated. 
He told me to “shut the fuck up and go to bed”. 
He then turned and started walking away, murmuring that he can’t get any sleep here. 
Sorry to interrupt your beauty sleep on the job for my health.
Clearly the officer took this shift because he thought it would be easy as all the slaves are locked away in cages, so there’s nothing to do.
As he walked off, I yelled after him, asking his name, and he turned and ran back to my cell door and yelled, “Clarke. That’s Clarke with an ‘E’, bitch. Do you want me to write it down for you on a BP8? Huh?”
He continued to intimidate me and threaten to send me to the box (solitary confinement) all-the-while insinuating that I was simply overreacting because he had seen similar cuts on people all the time and it seemed perfectly fine to him. 
He again called me a bitch, then walked across the hall to the cell across from mine and began to mock me with the other inmates asking, “Can you believe this little bitch here?”
He laughed and taunted me before finally walking away. 
I had no idea what to do now since I was continuing to bleed and had been completely humiliated, ignored, and vilified by the officer responsible for my well-being. 
This is incredibly unprofessional and absolutely unacceptable behavior. 
It’s a clear violation of federal law and civil rights. 
The officer eventually came back with a few Band-Aids, threw them at me and said, “Why don’t you stick your finger up your ass to stop the bleeding, bitch?” as he laughed and walked away.
Incredible.
The officer’s medical expertise and recommendation is indicative of ineffective training and a lack of morality that I find appalling. 
How can the Federal Bureau of Prisons condone and encourage such abhorrent behavior? 
I never received an answer as the warden ignored me. 
No repercussions. 
There is no accountability here. We are slaves and are treated as such.
