U.S. Thinks Agent Revealed Tunnel at Soviet Embassy
https://www.nytimes.com/2001/03/04/us/us-thinks-agent-revealed-tunnel-at-soviet-embassy.html
James Risen, Lowell Bergman
March 4, 2001

The United States government constructed a secret tunnel under the Soviet Union's embassy in Washington to eavesdrop, but federal investigators now believe the operation was betrayed by the F.B.I. agent who was arrested last month on charges of spying for Moscow, current and former United States intelligence and law enforcement officials say.

The secret tunnel operation, which officials indicated was run jointly by the F.B.I. and the National Security Agency, was part of a broad United States effort to eavesdrop on and track Soviet -- later Russian -- facilities and personnel operating in the United States.

Spokesmen at the F.B.I. and the White House declined to comment on the tunnel operation today.

Current and former United States officials estimated that the tunnel construction and related intelligence-gathering activities cost several hundred million dollars, apparently making it the most expensive clandestine intelligence operation that the agent, Robert Philip Hanssen, is accused of betraying. The tunnel was designed to aid in a sophisticated operation to eavesdrop on communications and conversations in the Soviet Embassy complex, which was built in the 1970's and 1980's but was not fully occupied until the 1990's.

In the 1980's, at about the time the tunnel operation was under way, the United States and the Soviet Union argued bitterly over their respective embassies in Moscow and Washington, with the United States accusing Moscow of spying at both locations.

The government has never publicly disclosed the existence of the tunnel operation. But in an F.B.I. affidavit in the Hanssen case, the government stated that Mr. Hanssen ''compromised an entire technical program of enormous value, expense and importance to the United States government.'' Officials said that was a reference to the tunnel operation and related intelligence activities.

Continue reading the main story
The government charges that Mr. Hanssen, a 25-year veteran of the F.B.I. and a counterintelligence expert, volunteered to spy for Moscow in October 1985. He was arrested on Feb. 18 in a Virginia park after leaving a package containing classified documents for his Russian handlers, according to the affidavit.

It could not be determined when the government believes Mr. Hanssen betrayed the tunnel operation and related intelligence-gathering activities targeting the embassy complex. Nor are many details known about how and when the operation was mounted, or whether it ever succeeded in collecting useful intelligence.

But the emerging belief that the tunnel program had been compromised was a factor in the government's decision to keep looking for additional spies after the 1994 arrest of the C.I.A. officer Aldrich H. Ames, according to current and former officials.

A secret investigative team was established to identify the source of a series of damaging intelligence losses, including the tunnel and related activities against the embassy, that could not be explained by Mr. Ames. Other unexplained intelligence losses -- including other technical intelligence programs, as well as the 1989 disclosure to Moscow that the F.B.I. was conducting an espionage investigation of a State Department official, Felix S. Bloch -- also prompted officials to begin a new mole hunt, officials added.

That mole-hunt team played a critical role in the counterespionage probe that led to Mr. Hanssen's arrest, United States officials said. It was a successor to an earlier C.I.A. mole-hunt team that helped uncover Mr. Ames. The tunnel was built under Moscow's embassy complex on Washington's Wisconsin Avenue, a hilltop location known as Mount Alto, officials said.

The Soviets were prevented for years from fully occupying the embassy complex as a result of a long-running dispute with the United States about charges that the American Embassy in Moscow had been thoroughly bugged. Soviet diplomats occupied apartments there in 1979, and Congressional critics charged that they were using those buildings as espionage outposts. In the mid-1980's, some American lawmakers claimed that the hilltop location would give the Soviets an edge in intelligence gathering against United States government buildings in Washington. The new embassy complex was not fully occupied until after the collapse of the Soviet Union.

Meanwhile, the American intelligence offensive against the embassy remained hidden from public view even as the United States publicly protested a Soviet campaign to lace the new United States Embassy in Moscow with listening devices. Construction on the new American Embassy in Moscow was halted in 1985 after the Reagan administration protested that Soviet construction crews were imbedding eavesdropping equipment within the walls of the new chancery building. The disclosure that the United States believed that the new embassy was bugged sparked Congressional hearings and criticism of the handling of the matter by the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency.

Ultimately, after considering tearing the embassy down, the United States flew in American construction workers and lopped off the top two floors and replaced them with two new secure floors before finally occupying the new facility.

The United States operation against the new Soviet Embassy in Washington, like the Soviet bugging of the United States Embassy complex, was designed to eavesdrop on electronic communications and conversations inside the facility. F.B.I. agents were secretly placed in critical jobs in some of the key contractors hired by the Soviets, according to an individual knowledegable about the planning of the operation. That individual said that bugging the building involved the use of secret technology developed by the intelligence community to pick up sounds inside a large building.

The tunnel operation against the Soviet complex, designed to tap into electronic communications inside the embassy facility, is just one of many similar clandestine technical operations run by the United States intelligence community, both during and since the cold war. And, like the embassy operation, many of those other operations were eventually compromised by spies.

In the 1950's, the C.I.A. dug a tunnel into East Berlin in order to tap into Soviet telephone lines. But George Blake, a British intelligence officer who was then a spy for Moscow, is believed to have betrayed the operation to the Soviets.

In the 1970's, the United States Navy used submarines to tap into Soviet undersea communications cables. In 1972, the Navy tapped into an undersea cable used by the Soviet Navy in the Pacific, largely in hopes of gaining intelligence about the locations of Soviet ballistic missile submarines. In 1979, the Navy began a similar operation in the Barents Sea to tap into a communications line that went to and from the headquarters of the Soviet Union's biggest fleet.

In 1980, Ronald Pelton, a former National Security Agency employee, compromised the Pacific cable tap operation by alerting the Soviets to the operation. But Mr. Pelton, who was arrested in 1985 on espionage charges, is not believed to have known about the Barents Sea operation, which continued for years afterward.

The C.I.A. also conducted a secret operation to tap into a communications line outside Moscow. Code-named TAW, that cable-tapping operation continued for several years in the early 1980's. But it is believed to have been compromised by Edward Lee Howard, a C.I.A. case officer who was fired from his job in 1983 and later began to spy for Moscow. Mr. Howard defected to Moscow in 1985. Mr. Ames may also have betrayed the TAW operation. He also apparently compromised a technical operation code-named Absorb, in which the C.I.A. hid sophisticated nuclear detection equipment on a rail car crossing the Soviet Union in an attempt to identify the locations of Soviet nuclear warheads.

Indeed, the record on the value of the intelligence gleaned from many of these high-cost technical intelligence programs is mixed, current and former officials say.

In fact, a former United States intelligence official said he was not certain that the Soviet Embassy tunnel operation ever actually produced any intelligence.

Another official suggested that technical problems prevented the operation from becoming productive. That official suggested that the tunnel was both compromised by a spy, and also failed on technical grounds.

*************************************************************************************************************************************

Best of Enemies: The Last Great Spy Story of the Cold War
Gus Russo, Eric Dezenhall
October 2, 2018

[Excerpt]

Chapter 5 - The IOC

Although Gennady spent as little time as possible in the rezidentura, when there, he shared a cubicle with other spies who would alter his life, as well as the history of espionage, in major ways. 

One was, like Gennady, another fan of American music: a young B. B. King–loving officer named Anatoly Stepanov (pseudonym), who was a KGB legacy, the son of another LINE KR officer. 

“He was a squirrelly guy,” remembers Gennady, who remembered Stepanov from the days when they both worked at Yasenevo. “Not really a team player, out for himself.” 

At the moment, Stepanov’s self-serving attitude was just a minor irritation, but it would come to haunt Gennady in the decades ahead.

[Excerpt]

Chapter 13 - A Heavy Box of Caviar

It all began as a minor Securitar office nuisance involving Lt. Col. Anatoly Stepanov, the B. B. King–loving KGB agent who had been posted with Gennady years before in Washington. Since those days in the seventies, Stepanov had risen to the position of deputy chief of Department S, which handled the Illegals (see Chs. Fourteen & Seventeen). But all the while, he coveted the top spot, and the rank of General, neither of which he was granted. After the KGB disbanded, Stepanov became involved, like so many of his peers, in the security consulting game, albeit with a singular lack of success. He also dabbled, again like many other peers, in the import-export trade.

“I ran into Stepanov at the annual meeting of retired officers,” remembered Gennady. The year was 1999. When asked how he was doing, Stepanov responded, “I don’t have a job.” Gennady’s former colleague added that he was also recently divorced and that his son was having behavior problems.

“Come on, stop by our office,” offered Gennady. 

“Securitar had a very large office, and many of our former colleagues stopped by often to use our space,” Gennady recalls. “The next week he stopped by Securitar and we said he could use a table and a phone.”

At Securitar, Stepanov proved to be ineffectual, and a bit of a sad sack to boot. Someone in the office secretarial pool nicknamed him “the Snake.” Gennady describes him as “a pain in the ass,” and he had quickly rung up a four-hundred-dollar bill at the office. The “pain in the ass” soon shared a tale of woe: in a frantic effort to make ends meet, he had recently gotten jammed up with Russian mobsters on a convoluted caviar import deal and wanted to travel to the United States to see if he could make a score in order to clear his marker with the mafia.

Stepanov told Gennady that he could help secure a 20 percent commission for Securitar if they sent him to New York, where the firm could collect a finder’s fee on a one-million-dollar shipment of caviar. That is, if he could convince the Russian hoodlums to not whack him in the interim. Cowboy and Gennady talked about it and mutually decided to assist Stepanov. Both Cowboy and Gennady have stated unequivocally that they had no idea the Snake’s desire to go to the US had to do with more than gangsters and caviar—but it was about espionage of the highest order.

Gennady told Cowboy that he wanted to help Stepanov if for no other reason than to bounce his old, annoying comrade from his office. Cowboy was sympathetic. He hardly knew Stepanov and already wanted to strangle the guy.

“I’ll try to bring him to New York. Does he have a passport?” Cowboy asked. 

“No, but I can take care of that if you can arrange a visa,” Gennady said. Stepanov had misplaced his passport years earlier. In those days, a Russian citizen could get a foreign passport issued by the Ministry of Internal Affairs or the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, where Gennady had many friends. “Since I knew all the guys working undercover at the foreign ministry,” Gennady explains, “I got a contract that gave me permission to sign verification documents for passports. I had already made dozens of passports for employees, family, et cetera. It took about three or four months to get [Stepanov]’s passport, but I got it.” Of course, visas were another matter.

On his next joint-venture trip to Moscow, Cowboy met with Stepanov, alone, in the Securitar office.

“Since you know Gennady, I can trust you,” Stepanov said, then added, “Perhaps we can make a separate deal.”

Cowboy held his gaze for a moment. He had an instinctively negative feeling toward the guy, but truth be told, Stepanov had never given Cowboy cause to dislike him. Until now. Cowboy thought he knew what Stepanov meant: trading intelligence for profit. He sensed that Stepanov might betray some relatively inconsequential Soviet information if he was safely in the US. After all, a lot of ex-KGB guys were now approaching the West, hoping to grab some quick cash.

Instead, Stepanov explained that in addition to the caviar caper, he wanted to sell some items in the US markets, specifically Russian matryoshka dolls. Fine, whatever, Cowboy thought.

Cowboy, for his part, was hell-bent on nailing whoever had sold out Gennady in Havana, but in the absence of knowing who that was, he wanted to help his associates in the FBI and the CIA in their never-ending campaign to hunt down traitors. He would therefore attempt to introduce Stepanov to the FBI’s mole-hunting team if the man indeed came to the US, just as Cowboy had done with many of Gennady’s colleagues. Gennady was aware he was doing it but thought nothing of it; none of his colleagues knew anything about moles and double agents.

“I didn’t want any FBI salary,” Cowboy said. “I just did it to find out who killed Gennady’s friends and sent him to Lefortovo. Eighty percent of my motivation was to find out who killed them and who almost killed my friend Genya.” Cowboy also knew about the Bureau’s “Pennywise” list of the Russians who could, at least in theory, have information about who American traitors might be.

Soon after his discussions with Stepanov began, Cowboy alerted Mike Rochford in Washington. Roch realized instantly that Stepanov was, unbeknownst to Cowboy and Gennady, near the top of the “Pennywise” list. Roch had, in fact, had a few exploratory meetings with Stepanov in Europe but never got very far with him, in large measure because Stepanov didn’t feel safe, and wouldn’t until he was in the United States. At the time, Roch had been searching for information about CIA officer Brian Kelley, who was wrongly suspected for some time of being the traitor. Perhaps some seemingly innocuous piece of information Stepanov possessed might get the Bureau one puzzle piece closer to closing the book on Kelley, or whoever the bastard was. By this point, every scrap of information, no matter how small, was precious.

Cowboy kept his old colleagues at the CIA informed about what was going on on his end, but they treated him like a nuisance, convinced he was simply trying to prove that he had been right all along about the Americans’ investment in Gennady, which in fact he was.

Now the challenge was how to get Stepanov to New York to meet with Rochford in a way that would make him feel comfortable and wouldn’t raise the hackles of Russian intelligence. Gennady, who was facilitating the passport application, obviously couldn’t write “Seeking to collect for the Russian Mafia fee owed by applicant for stolen caviar.” Furthermore, Cowboy and Roch couldn’t make the whole effort seem too urgent or Gennady would perceive risk and shut the entire passport process down. So Cowboy and Roch had to find a suitable business partner for Stepanov’s Russian doll deal.

Cowboy orchestrated the charade beautifully. The FBI had a contact who had become an art curator at the prestigious Frick Collection in New York. According to sources, Edgar Munhall, who was openly gay, had attempted to join the FBI as a young man but was put off by its intolerant culture. Nevertheless, he had maintained contacts with the Bureau and indicated that he would be pleased to introduce Stepanov to some art dealers who might be in the market to buy precious Russian dolls.

Cowboy had a few preliminary meetings with Munhall, who had no idea of the role he was playing in the big picture, and who constantly addressed Cowboy as “Hey, Handsome!” Cowboy growled at him and contemplated how he, a Marine from Texas, could be involved with the whole New York art scene. Cowboy ultimately concluded that if he could barely tolerate it, the homophobic Russian intelligence services would surely not suspect that a counterintelligence operation was under way.

In Moscow, Gennady countersigned the paperwork for Stepanov at the KGB’s passport office. Gennady has always said that his only motive for arranging for the passport was “getting this asshole off my back about coming to the US to try to make a buck.”

Cowboy reminded Gennady that he would introduce Stepanov to Rochford, as he had with all of Gennady’s visiting ex-KGB pals. “You know and I know I’m helping the FBI,” Cowboy said to his friend. “But not to worry, because this snake won’t talk to them—and he probably doesn’t have anything anyway.”

In April 2000, Stepanov flew to New York. And Mike Rochford, with an FBI team in tow, was on his way, too. Cowboy traveled separately by bus. Before Stepanov’s arrival, Cowboy and Rochford met at a hotel to plan out how they were going to manage the recruitment. “I’ll meet him first, take him to the curator, and suss him out to see if he’s approachable,” Cowboy told Rochford.

After Stepanov arrived in Manhattan, Cowboy introduced him to Munhall at the Frick, who, true to his word, expressed curiosity about Stepanov’s Russian dolls. Stepanov’s eyes lit up at the prospect of making some money from the sale. Cowboy took note and asked himself, What if the bastard is led to believe he’ll lose the deal?

During a lunch that followed, Stepanov told Cowboy that he possessed “volume one of the case.” Cowboy thought, What the hell does that even mean? But he really didn’t want to know. However, Cowboy had never made a secret of how badly he wanted to nail whoever got Gennady nicked in Havana years before, so he wishfully assumed it might have something to do with the US traitor. Later, back at the hotel, Cowboy reported the “volume one” reference to Rochford and said that Roch should proceed with Stepanov. At that point, Cowboy’s job was to make the Frick’s curator unavailable to Stepanov for a while in order to buy time for Rochford to make his move.

One day, Stepanov emerged from a meeting onto a New York sidewalk and he “accidentally” ran into Mike Rochford, who said, “Hey, I’d like to talk to you.” Stepanov looked at Roch like he was “crazy,” Roch says, “and he should have. [He] tells me he doesn’t talk to strangers, and I show him my business card, and we start chatting.” Roch reminded him that they had met before, overseas.
Stepanov said, “Mike, I never trusted anybody who won’t drink with me.” 

Roch quickly located a watering hole with a suitable private corner table.

When Stepanov wasn’t meeting with Rochford, he was meeting his new friend Jack Platt, who in turn was reporting back to Rochford. By week two, the FBI man was ready to throw in the towel with this Stepanov character. That’s when Jack gave Roch a pep talk, one that changed history.

In a later interview for Washington’s International Spy Museum, Roch described, without naming Jack, how a “team member” kept “kicking me out the door. I didn’t want to go.” Jack recalled, “I told Roch, ‘Whatever you’re doing, keep on doing it, because he hasn’t asked about you. He hasn’t mentioned being interrogated. He’ll meet with you again.’”

Jack had to massage Stepanov’s psyche, edging him ever closer to betraying his country. At this stage, Jack had gone from being dismissive of “the Snake” to thinking this could actually be the real thing. Even the swashbuckler Jack was now nervous playing this game, employing all his countersurveillance skills as he feared for his own safety. Writing a brilliant script on the fly, Jack met with Stepanov and informed him that the Frick curator had changed his mind about the Russian dolls. Suddenly, Stepanov found himself stranded in New York without any money and with only one prospect: selling whatever “volume one of the case” was. Jack was now certain “the Snake” was primed to deal with Rochford.

With his job accomplished, Jack left the city, and Rochford and others on his team took over the operation. Jack was anxious to get back to his consulting work and didn’t give the Snake or the curator another thought.

Back in the bars, Stepanov insisted that establishing trust with Roch was critical to moving the relationship to another level. Roch understood and agreed. So they drank, the Russian-speaking Rochford remembers. “Over two weeks, we bar hopped. When we drank Tullamore Dew [triple-distilled Irish whiskey] he loosened up. I wanted to rename the operation ‘Tell Me More, Dude.’” After about the tenth day of speaking Russian and sniffing each other out, Rochford was again on the verge of writing off the feckless doll/caviar trader, when Stepanov offered to tell him about how the KGB came upon a “particular event” and its status. Author David Wise coaxed some of the ensuing conversation out of Rochford for his 2003 book Spy.

Rochford told his target that he didn’t know what “particular event” he was talking about.

“I can tell you know what I’m talking about,” Stepanov said. “You’ll have to agree to sit down with me, and we’ll write up a contract, and we’ll set out how I will go about the business of trying to help you solve this matter.”

“Well, that’s worth my time. We’ll get off the streets, we’ll go up to the hotel, and we’ll do this.”
Stepanov pressed the FBI for money. The FBI’s response was simple: “No dossier, no dough.”

During the course of Rochford’s discussions with Stepanov, the Russian informed him that he indeed possessed what the Americans were looking for: explosive information about the Russians’ asset inside the US intelligence apparatus. Rochford, normally so skilled in maintaining a poker face, was stunned, and worried that he betrayed his surprise. This one sentence vindicated Rochford, the literally hundreds of mole-hunting staff, and the great expense that had been allocated to the operation for over a decade. Of course, one major detail nagged at the investigator: How on earth had a KGB snake like Stepanov come to possess the mother lode?
Interviews with well-placed sources, who understandably would rather go unnamed, assert the following series of events:

* Nine years earlier *

In August 1991, a cabal of Communist Party hard-liners decided they had had enough of President Mikhail Gorbachev’s reforms and audaciously decided to stage a coup. Vice President Gennady Yanayev declared himself president and had Gorbachev “detained” at his Crimean summer home. The military, ostensibly under Yanayev’s control, closed the Crimean airport so Gorbachev could not return to Moscow. Soviet states (now independent countries) condemned the coup, as did US president George H. W. Bush. Realizing their lack of support, within two days the coup leaders fled to the Crimea, and Gorbachev returned to power.

The swiftness of the coup’s collapse masked the sheer uncertainty and terror being felt in the bowels of the Soviet government. On August 22, the blowback against the hard-liners reached its peak, with some twenty thousand protestors storming Dzerzhinsky Square, the fabled home of the KGB inside the Lubyanka building. After hours of toil, a government employee commandeered a massive German crane, from which a noose was placed around the neck of “Iron Felix” Dzerzhinsky, the fifteen-ton, thirty-six-foot-high cast-iron statue of the KGB’s founder. As the statue was being garroted for removal, inside Lubyanka, fears were mounting as to just how far the KGB-hating celebrants would take this catharsis.

The Soviets became panicked that their most sensitive and incriminating intelligence files would be exposed during the riots, confiscated by the ecstatic, yet unruly, hordes. Watching from his fifth-floor Lubyanka office, KGB chairman Leonid Shebarshin gave the order: “Close and block all doors and gates. Check the gratings.”

The last of the Soviets had reason to be terrified. And the coincidence of the German crane was not lost on any of them. Two years earlier, during the waning hours of the East German regime, officers in the headquarters of the once menacing Stasi, the Ministry for State Security, began frantically destroying files. They shredded some and burned others. Some of the Erfurt townspeople noticed that dark smoke was bellowing out of the chimneys. Realizing the building was heated by gas and that gas produced white smoke, a furious mob rightly assumed that something other than gas was being burned. They stormed and occupied the building on December 4, 1989. They alerted military prosecutors and, once inside headquarters, began tossing state files out the windows and into the streets. Prosecutors seized the files for immediate review. This phenomenon had been replicated in Stasi buildings all over East Germany.

While the word “paranoid” is often wrongly invoked to describe the sentiments of the mighty, paranoia is defined as an irrational fear. What the KGB was feeling as news of the Soviet coup spread was a completely rational fear of their secrets being exposed.

Mindful of the sheer terror East German officials had felt when the oppressed masses stormed their headquarters, the KGB began surrounding their own buildings with guards, especially Lubyanka and the Yasenevo headquarters. They proceeded to load their files onto trucks for transport to a temporary “safe” storage facility in Smolensk. There was little or no supervision, not to mention a complete absence of inventory. There were thousands of archival storage boxes of files being loaded into trucks, with hundreds of KGB officers involved in this frantic exercise.

One of the transporters at Yasenevo was Anatoly Stepanov, who felt there was a good reason why people hid things: because there were terrible things they did not want you to know!

At the time of the coup, Stepanov had a lot on his mind, one being the outrage of having been passed over for a recent promotion. He was also worried—not about the Russian mob, but about his future, as were most of the newly unemployed KGB agents he knew, who were scrambling to get out. All his comrades were now his competition. What would an erstwhile KGB officer do under a new regime? Be indicted? Executed? Flee the country for a new life someplace? And where would that someplace be? Perhaps someplace that wanted to better understand the inner workings of the KGB. Someplace like the United States.

Anatoly Stepanov needed an edge. 

At the Yasenevo facility, Stepanov was one of many soon-to-be-former KGB officers moving files from storage vaults onto rolling carts, then down endless corridors to loading docks, and finally onto transport trucks. As he was loading one cart, his eyes caught a particular box of material labeled in Cyrillic, which translated to English as LINE KR/US TOP SECRET. In the box were envelopes with US postmarks, smaller boxes containing floppy disks of US manufacture, a reel-to-reel tape box labeled RAMON GARCIA, and two dark green plastic trash bags of the type usually used for clandestine drop-offs. Whether it occurred to him in the moment or he had it planned all along, Stepanov decided that this particular box would stay with him for closer observation. It might hold valuable information that he could ransom off for a new life far away from the Russian Mafia and the disintegrating USSR. In the chaos, as he pushed the rolling cart slowly down the hall, he needed to come up with a plan.

Perhaps he waited until he was alone in the hallway to quickly move the box into a janitorial closet for later removal, or he pretended it was part of his personal belongings, which he cleared out of his desk as many did that night. In any event, the treasure made its way into his car trunk before dawn and eventually to his vacation cabin in the country. When he had the box safely inside his dacha, Stepanov read the detailed letters and knew what he had, and the implications of it were consequential in the extreme.

Stepanov haul was the equivalent of winning the international espionage’s lottery: the KGB’s official file on their prized second traitor inside US intelligence. But wanting to sell off the incendiary material and doing it were two very different things—getting caught would likely mean a year of torture in the gulag, followed by a bullet to the skull in the basement of Lefortovo. And who knew what would happen to his wife and children?

So Stepanov cogitated, and waited. For eight years. After almost a decade of keeping his treasure in storage, he put his Machiavellian scheme into high gear when he saw the relationship between Jack and Gennady, in late 1999, when Stepanov met Jack Platt in Moscow. Stepanov knew that in order to market his jackpot he would need to make his way to the United States to speak with the American authorities. He also knew that Cowboy Jack was just such an American authority.*

At the end of their two-week New York courtship in the spring of 2000, Rochford and Stepanov finally agreed on the terms of their deal. Rochford explained that he would need a signoff from the directors of the FBI and the CIA, and a legal contract would have to be drawn up for payment for Stepanov’s services. While the terms have never been made public, and Rochford won’t discuss them, sources have said that Stepanov negotiated himself into a fat $7 million payday—much more than the ascribed $1 million bounty. He and his family also were to be relocated to the US and receive new identities.

Now the question was How the hell would they get the material to the US? Arrangements were made for Stepanov to return to Moscow, retrieve the goods (Cowboy theorized he had been keeping it in his dacha), and make a handoff in a neutral country. During this time, the CIA’s Mike Sulick authorized a hefty deposit into Stepanov’s new US bank account while other CIA case officers made plans to pick up the package in the neutral country and send it to a third country via diplomatic pouch, then on to the United States by chartered plane. Pulling off the delicate transmission would take months of planning and execution. In one heart-stopping instance, the CIA thought it had been the victim of another brilliant Russian con, when Stepanov failed to show for the exchange. The Bureau established a reconnection, likely with Jack’s assistance, and the transmission was back on track.

In October 2000, while Rochford and his team set about having Stepanov’s material arrive safely in the US, Jack made his last HTG trip to Moscow. While visiting Moscow’s KGB Museum inside the Lubyanka, a young military type approached Jack, and Jack could tell right away he was FSB.
“I work for the Russian government,” said the stranger. 
“Cut the shit and save both our time,” Jack responded in his best Cowboy mode. “Who do you really work for?”
The man then smiled knowingly, showed Jack his Ministry of Internal Affairs ID, and asked, “Can we talk?”
“Sure, but not here. Tomorrow at the Securitar office.”

Later that night, Gennady took Jack on a sightseeing tour of Moscow. While Gennady wandered off, likely to flirt with an Intourist guide, Cowboy was taking photographs of Red Square when a group of thugs approached. Emboldened by the sight of an older man wearing cowboy boots, a Stetson, and a black vest, they pointed to his camera, expressing their annoyance of his clicking shutter noise. The Muscovites lumbered toward Cowboy, knives drawn. Cowboy hadn’t lost his vanity, his self-perception that he was a Marine who could handle himself, and while he wasn’t afraid, he was at a loss for tactics. What would he actually do, a sixty-one-year-old, against four twenty-something Neanderthals? One of them knocked the camera out of Cowboy’s hand, and it fell to the ground, parts scattering. It was the only time in Cowboy’s life when he wished he had carried his .357.

“I guess somebody’s got a guilty conscience,” Cowboy said. He didn’t know why he had said it, but people seldom know why they do what they do under siege.

The assailants looked at one another in disbelief. A leather-clad unibrow reached to grab Cowboy by the collar with his free hand, but all the air retreated from Unibrow’s lungs and he felt sharp spiderwebs of pain radiating from below his neck as if a missile had hit him high on his back. His knife fell to the ground. Unibrow staggered as the man to his right turned and found his chin briefly but decisively attached to the end of an implement that was not meant to intersect with a human jaw. This man was the second to be put out of commission by the primal, bat-wielding Gennady, firing Russian epithets from his mouth as if it were the barrel of one of his cherished guns.

The third goon stood in shock, seemingly more at the alien language than the prostrate condition of his cohorts, and Gennady banged him just hard enough on the mouth with the end of the bat to make him spit teeth onto the sidewalk. Meanwhile, the fourth man suddenly found himself a solo operator. “I think you are my favorite,” Gennady told the terrified mook in accented English. “When you got up this morning, you didn’t plan on being alone, did you? It’s easy to have confidence when you have friends.”

Gennady head-faked the last man a few times. After the fourth or fifth fake, a “Fuck this shit” expression fell across the man’s face, and he tore away to parts unknown.

Gennady looked at a thunderstruck Jack Platt and pointed to his camera. “Get your camera, Jack. We go now.”

They ran to their car and drove off. 

“Genya, you saved my life.” 

Gennady was philosophical. “Okay, then. You will someday save mine.” 

Jack did not tell Gennady that he had once dreamed that all this would happen.

Back at Securitar the next day, the FSB man arrived on time, and he and Jack walked outside for a tête-à-tête.

“Okay, why are we here?” Jack asked. 

“We’re interested in you,” the FSB agent responded. “We saw that mafia report you did in Virginia Beach. Why don’t you make a contract with us, like you have with Gennady?”

The poor guy had no idea that he was dealing with one of the most patriotic Marines imaginable. Jack knew exactly what the agent was pitching.

“Take this back to your bosses,” Jack said. “Fuck no! And I never got a contract with Gennady!”
 The poor guy jumped, Jack later said. 

As a result of these encounters, Jack decided never to return to Russia. 

That same month, after some time away, Anatoly Stepanov stopped by the Securitar office and explained his absence to Gennady by saying that he had just been very busy. Gennady remembers that he then “just disappeared, for good.”*

Soon after Jack’s return from Moscow, Stepanov’s box of material completed its circuitous route to FBI headquarters in Washington. At least one highly placed member of the FBI’s mole-hunting team says that the “coincidence” of Jack’s return and the appearance of the prized file was anything but. “Jack and an FBI agent went to Vienna to retrieve the cache,” says the source, who requested anonymity. It would make sense that the Bureau would want the master of surveillance avoidance to retrieve the precious bounty. Also, Jack had been stationed in Vienna, so he was familiar with the city’s best handoff and dead-drop locations. It is also a reasonable assumption that Jack made the Vienna side trip after his Moscow excursion. Or perhaps the Moscow trip had been an elaborate cover for the real reason for Jack’s overseas travel. If Jack indeed acted as courier for the coveted mole file, it would add weight to his reason for never wanting to return to Russia, where the vindictive Sasha Zhomov might see to it that the next group of thugs was much more adept than the ones Jack had recently encountered.

Whatever the details about the handoff, the cache arrived safely and FBI analysts got to work. Included among the paperwork and floppy disks were two of the traitor’s plastic dead-drop bags, which, after being powdered, revealed two telltale prints. There was also a taped conversation between the traitor, who used the pseudonym “Ramon Garcia,” and his KGB handler. What the analysts heard stunned them. They had been expecting to hear the voice of the CIA’s Brian Kelley. But instead they heard the voice of one of their own, FBI agent Robert Hanssen. When the prints were analyzed, they also belonged to Hanssen.

There was a war going on inside Mike Rochford’s gut. They got him! But “he” was an FBI man. Nobody had thought the bastard would be FBI, let alone the straitlaced, low-key Bob Hanssen. Hanssen was no Rick Ames, he of the newly capped teeth, young wife, shiny Jaguar, and cash-paid suburban house with the fancy curtains.

On his birthday, February 18, 2001, Jack received a call from someone at the Bureau whom he later would only identify as a friend. “Listen to the news tonight. Happy birthday.”

Jack tuned in the evening news and learned that Hanssen had been arrested in Northern Virginia. It was soon determined that he had sold out not only the United States’ most hard-won spies but also its billion-dollar tunnel underneath the DC rezidentura. As a result, the Russians had been feeding disinformation into the tunnel for years. The tunnel had been the penetration that Stepanov had alluded to during his negotiations with Rochford, the one that had knocked him off-balance.

To say that Robert Hanssen was an odd duck would be an understatement. He surely was no exotic “Ramon Garcia,” the name he gave his Soviet handlers. The son of an overbearing Chicago policeman who reminded young Bob of his inadequacy at every turn, Hanssen was, on the surface, a convert to Catholicism who lived with his wife and four children in suburban Virginia. Some described Hanssen as a dour and pale office dweller with a gloomy appearance. These colleagues referred to him behind his back as “the Mortician.” Indeed, in his mug-shot photo, a black-clad Hanssen resembles the cadaverous Lurch in the television serious The Addams Family.

This portrayal, however, may be driven too much by hindsight and the self-serving human instinct to proclaim, “I knew it!” Other coworkers thought of Hanssen as a shy but pleasant intellectual who enjoyed engaging with others with whom he was comfortable. His arrest, in fact, struck younger colleagues with horror, as they had come to think of him as a mentor. If they had failed to flag Hanssen as a traitor, what other fundamentals about their universe were they getting wrong? This was a question that pierced the vanity of the FBI as an institution. There was a reason Hanssen was such a devastating spy: he was very, very good at fooling the best of the best.

Hanssen was a member of Opus Dei, a cultlike offshoot of Catholicism that demanded extraordinary and even self-punishing ritual demands of its practitioners. In his soul, he was the mirror image of what he projected to the world. He visited strip clubs and secretly—and routinely—videotaped himself with his wife, Bonnie, having sex. He even alerted at least one friend to his amorous schedule so that the friend could observe the Hanssens in bed from a perch outside their window.

Genuinely smart, Hanssen saw himself as being intellectually superior to his FBI colleagues. Still, he was careful not to inflict his brain on others. But there was a confection of arrogance and insecurity baking deep—very deep—beneath the surface. He surely thought that never meeting his Soviet handlers face-to-face was a stroke of brilliance that would insulate him from capture, and for a long time he was right. Scholars of the case suspect that, in addition to the $1.4 million he received for his services, his grandiose and unrequited sense of destiny drove him voluntarily into the arms of the Soviets not long after joining the FBI. After all, the Soviets hadn’t seduced Hanssen: he had gone after them. No, the genius Hanssen had been too gifted to rise slowly through the ranks like the dullards around him. He had made his financial and psychic fortune on the side, undermining his employer and his country at every step—facilitating murder if he must—all the while living in a rich interior realm where he alone was king.

When Gennady heard the news about Hanssen’s arrest so soon after he had signed Stepanov’s passport application, he had a sickening feeling that Cowboy had possibly jeopardized him yet again. The Russians already thought Gennady was too tight with the Americans. And Sasha was still lurking somewhere in the FSB shadows.
When Gennady spoke to Cowboy, he was furious. He shouted, “You used me, you son of a bitch! I could have been killed.”
Cowboy explained, “I handed him over, but no one really thought he had anything. I sure as hell didn’t think it would be Hanssen. He was the bastard that dropped the dime on you in Havana! The one who put you in Lefortovo!”
“And you’re the one who might get me a bullet in the head! Why didn’t you tell me what you were after?” Gennady pressed. “I thought it was about caviar and some matryoshka doll bullshit!”
“I didn’t know what we were gonna get, Gennady. And in the long shot that we’d get something big, I didn’t want to put you in jeopardy. But this is my country. I didn’t take yours away from you. Don’t take mine away from me! I’m an American; you’re a Russian.”

“They’re going to think I knew!” 

“Nobody knew!” Cowboy said. “All you did was sign a passport application. A million things had to happen totally out of your reach, out of your knowledge, and out of your control.”

“You know the CIA, but I know the KGB,” replied Gennady. “Here, evidence isn’t even needed for an execution.”

Gennady might have made his worst ever mistake. But what could he do? He knew what he had done and what he hadn’t done. He saw no action for himself other than to hope that his old nemesis Sasha Zhomov would never differentiate between the passport application Gennady had signed for Stepanov and the scores of others he had routinely signed. No, all he could do was hold his breath.

Ben Wickham says that both Cowboy and Gennady had had no idea they were getting the double agent by signing off for Stepanov. For Gennady it had been just a way to get the Snake out of his hair; for Cowboy it had been the longest of long shots. “It wasn’t terribly unusual to get a visa for someone,” Wickham explains. “Cowboy was almost [as] surprised as Genya when he heard that [Stepanov] actually had the file.”

Both double agents had finally been taken down—Hanssen’s twenty-two-year traitorous career had cost not only lives but also over a billion dollars of electronic, computer, and spy-satellite information, while Ames’s nineteen years of espionage had killed at least nine CIA assets.

Asked if he ever thought about getting Ames or Hanssen in a room, Cowboy said, “I think about it a lot… I’d say, ‘From now on your wife should never start the car. Look who you’ve put in jeopardy. Fuck you!’” Indeed, Matty Caulfield says, “The only times I saw Jack insanely mad was over the Ames and Hanssen betrayals.”

The takedown of Robert Hanssen was an intersection of extreme patience, good luck, firewalls, and operatives—witting and unwitting—bumping into one another and exploiting one another as circumstances arose. Nobody fully knew what they had until Hanssen was arrested, not even Stepanov.

The Hanssen takedown also prompts a few questions: 

Is it possible that Gennady truly knew nothing about what the endgame of the caviar caper had been? The short answer is that everyone involved with the operation insists Gennady was kept in the dark about its objective. This is supported by the claims of the players that no one—not even Stepanov—was fully aware of what was in those pilfered files. To believe that Gennady knew he was conspiring to take down the prized Russian asset is to accept that the multiple players in the enterprise knew from the beginning, in linear fashion, precisely what the payoff would be.

Might Gennady have suspected at the very least that he was helping in some kind of counterespionage operation without knowing its details? Perhaps, but the kind of opportunistic deals that were presenting themselves in the business and intelligence communities after the collapse of the Soviet Union were commonplace. It is reasonable to assume Gennady signed off on Stepanov’s passport application, as he did with others, without differentiating it from the numerous other inquiries that crossed his desk. To this day, Gennady categorically states that he had no idea he was doing anything to help nail Hanssen.

Another question is why would Jack Platt manipulate his friend Gennady in a manner that would get him in trouble, all the while claiming that his true objective was to get the man who had set up Gennady’s capture, torture, and imprisonment years earlier? There are a few possibilities. The first, of course, is that Jack, too, was operating in the dark. This is hard to believe because, by his own admission, he wanted to capture the man who turned out to be Hanssen. Jack also worked actively with the FBI. One cannot both be part of a top-flight team to take down one of the greatest traitors of the twentieth century and be a babe in the woods.

Far more plausible is that Jack wanted to help roll up a big traitor and didn’t really know where the whole program would lead. We can also look again to his own words when he was asked during the 60 Minutes interview if true friends put each other in peril: “It may not be what friends do, but it may be what good intelligence officers do.” Indeed, while Jack’s friendship with Gennady mattered enormously to him, his commitment to his duty mattered more. Semper fi.

Years after Hanssen’s takedown, Rochford said,* “[Stepanov] is really somewhat of a hero to the US government… I’ll always be thankful to him for what he’s done.” Rochford has no idea where Stepanov is today, though. “He was ready to talk and to cooperate. The government was ready to write the check and support him in ways that he needed, and so we came to a good understanding. We were flexible, and he was flexible at a tough time in his life, so I think that’s what it takes. You have to realize that it’s a relationship, and these things aren’t just ‘Slam, bam, thank you, ma’am, we’re done.’ These things are ongoing.”

Other heroes in this episode were Musketeers Jack Platt and Dion Rankin, who concluded that had they not been patient with Gennady for two decades, against CIA wishes, Stepanov would never have met Cowboy Jack, who then turned him over to Rochford, all leading to the unmasking of Robert Hanssen. It was these two Musketeers all along who had pleaded with their respective bosses to take things slow with Gennady. They knew that if their investment was to pay off, it would pay off in the distant future, even if no one envisioned precisely how—and no one could have. It had been, in the meantime, softly, softly, catchee monkey.

The Hanssen roll-up was not the only spy drama that played out in 2001, in what turned out to be a big year in espionage. And these other events would have grave implications for Gennady in the years to come.

Stepanov, of course, never collected the $1 million caviar payment because there never was any caviar, or matryoshka dolls, for that matter; the whole escapade had been a ruse. He collected many times that amount for nailing Hanssen. And Gennady, having unwittingly taken the second biggest risk of all, was left with a security job and the nagging fear that somewhere out there Sasha Zhomov would be looking for somebody to pay the invoice for Robert Hanssen. Anybody.

[Excerpt]

Chapter 17 - The Russian Reset Button

For two hours I was put through the standard procedure: searches, fingerprinting, documentation, shower, and at 4 o’clock in the morning I was finally put in a cell. Of course I couldn’t sleep. I was trying to understand what could be the reason to bring me here again. I already knew about the arrest of the Illegals in New York and the only reason I was taken to Lefortovo, I guessed, was so that I could be a witness for the conviction of [Stepanov], whom I had helped to get a passport and visa to go to the US. I thought maybe he was involved also with helping identify the Illegals. That must be the reason I was spending a 6th year in prison on a three-year sentence.

[Excerpt]

Chapter 18 - Endgame

Aleksandr Zaporozhsky and Anatoly Stepanov are also living with new identities somewhere in the US.


************************************************************************************************************************************


The Seven Milion Dollar Spy
David Wise
October 2, 2018

[Excerpt]

Chapter 16 - Moscow Contact

On a trip to Moscow in 1999, Platt visited the offices of Securitar, a private investigative agency headed by an ex-KGB agent.
He met there with his partner, Vasilenko, who had worked at the securitar company for several years in the 1990s.
One of the employees was another former KGB officer, whose position at the firm was precarious.
He was having a hard time, a colleague recalled.
His wife divorced him, he lost his job at a bank, and Securitar took him in, and gave him a desk and a phone.
But he was
nothing but trouble running up a big
phone bill but not producing any clients
they wanted to get rid of him 
His name was Alexandr V. Shcherbakov.
Now nearing 50, and with his future uncertain, he approached vasilenko and asked if he would introduce him to Platt.
Vasilenko did, but did not stay for their meeting.
"You are a businessman, Shcherbakov said to Platt.
"Can you introduce me to some people? I am in the business of selling artifacts."
He pleaded with Platt to put him in touch with contacts in the business world in the US.
His hope, he said, was to export works of art, such as the small hand-painted lacquered boxes from Pollock, for which Russia is famous.
Or paintings, or icons.
Platt cut him off.
"Absolutely not," he said.
"I will not have anything to do with smuggling icons out of Russia."
It was illegal, he pointed out.
Shcherbakov continued to importune Platt to help him.
At the time, Russians could not easily leave to travel abroad without a reason.
Perhaps, Shcherbakov persisted, Platt could arrange for one of his business contacts to send him an invitation to come to New York. 
That would provide the pretext he needed to travel overseas.
Platt made no commitment to the Russian.
All he said at the end of their meeting was, let me look into it.


"Riddle Resolved: Who Dimed Out American Traitor and Super-Spy, Robert Hanssen?"
https://www.newsweek.com/who-dimed-out-american-traitor-super-spy-robert-hanssen-1196080
Jeff Stein
November 1, 2018

For over two decades, students of the spy wars between Russia and America have pondered one of the great remaining mysteries of the Cold War: Who finally dimed out  Robert Hanssen, the FBI turncoat said to be the most destructive traitor in the annals of U.S. intelligence?

Now we know, according to an posthumously published book by the late David Wise, the authoritative espionage writer who died from pancreatic cancer last month. The informant, Wise writes, was Alexandr Shcherbakov, a down-on-his-luck former KGB officer who delivered the Kremlin's dossier on Hanssen to an FBI counterspy who had pursued the case for years.  

It was a handsome payday for Shcherbakov, now resettled under protection in this country: Wise's book, released only in audio form in mid-October, calls him The Seven Million Dollar Spy. With Wise dead, no advance copies available and no hardcover in the stores, the normally best-selling author's book has escaped attention until now.

Hanssen, a disgruntled senior FBI computer geek who spied intermittently for the Russians from 1979 until his arrest following a dead drop in the snowy woods of Virginia in 2001, produced "possibly the worst intelligence disaster in U.S. history," according to a later damage report.

Charged with helping the FBI ferret out Russian moles, Hanssen was not only privy to some of the most sensitive secrets in U.S. intelligence, he was in position to steer suspicion away from himself.  Nicknamed “the mortician” by snickering colleagues for his dark suits and dour demeanor, Hanssen ''betrayed an astonishing 50 human sources or recruitment targets” of the FBI and CIA, a number of whom were executed, according to Wise. He also gave the Russians top secret details about a U.S. electronic spying program and progress reports on a tunnel the FBI was digging under the Russian embassy in Washington, D.C. , among other secrets.

Faced with the mounting loss of its agents in Russia in the 1980s, U.S. counterspies first zeroed in on Aldrich Ames, an alcoholic CIA turncoat in the bowels of the CIA's Soviet division. When other losses couldn't be explained by Ames's perfidy, they renewed their mole hunt and fixed on another CIA operative, Brian Kelley,  whose life and career were upended until Hanssen was caught.

Years passed. The FBI refused to believe one of its own could go bad.

The trail to Hanssen eventually sprung from a post-Cold War business partnership between Jack Platt, a legendary former CIA officer, and Gennady Vasilenko, a former KGB spy whom Platt had tried, and failed, to recruit over the years. As vividly told in another new book that touches on the Hanssen case, Best of Enemies: The Last Great Spy Story of the Cold War, the rivals' mutual admiration blossomed into a deep friendship. After the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, they went into business together in a security services company that won Russian clients. Eventually, Vasilenko hired another KGB officer to work in the Moscow office, whom Best of Enemies co-authors Gus Russo and Eric Dezenhall call Anatoly Stepanov.

In reality, it was Shcherbakov, according to Wise, who began writing about the CIA in 1960.  

Russo and Dezenhall had planned to name Shcherbakov, too.  But they swapped his name out for a pseudonym at the last minute because they feared for his safety, Russo told Newsweek. Only months earlier, Russian agents had been implicated in a nerve-agent assault on Sergei Skripal, a defector living in England. It was the latest in a long string of attacks on defectors and dissidents, allegedly with the approval of Russian President Vladimir Putin, himself a former KGB officer.  Last summer Kremlin hit squads were reported to be pursuing defectors living in the U.S.

“After Skripal was poisoned, and other [Vladimir] Putin retributions, and after a conference with the publisher, we decided we didn't want to add to the jeopardy he was already in,” Russo told Newsweek.  “Also, our sources asked us to not reveal the name for the same reason.”

“I am sure we could could have gotten major news attention had we have given him up,” Russo added, “but we don't regret the decision.”

Shcherbakov defected to the U.S. in 2010, lured in a convoluted operation quarterbacked by veteran FBI mole-hunter Mike Rochford, according to both books.  In an extraordinary move, Putin publicly fingered Shcherbakov for ratting out a ring of Russian “illegals” living as Americans in the U.S., including the infamous Anna Chapman, and threatened to assassinate him. (Adding to the mysteries, yet another new book on the mole wars, The Skripal Files: The Life and Near Death of a Russian Spy, by BBC journalist Mark Urban, says another defector, Alexander Poteyev, not Shcherbakov, outed the illegals.)  But the Kremlin never tied Shcherbakov—at least publicly—to the Hanssen disclosure.

Says Russo: “We were 99 percent certain that the SVR [the successor to the KGB's foreign spying arm] knew he was the guy, but we didn't want to add to their certainty.”  With Russian goons on the loose, Shcherbakov has to be careful about how he spends his great windfall.

Indeed, the 30-year mole war isn't over, at least for some former CIA officers. Milton Bearden, who once headed the agency's Soviet division, has long believed there's yet another Russian mole who escaped detection.

“He would be pretty long in the tooth about now,” Bearden told Newsweek. "In his eighties or in his grave.”  Some say the CIA has stopped looking, preferring to sweep such an embarrassment under the rug. But to others, the mole wars will never end.

This story has been updated with a claim in another new book that a different defector, not Shcherbakov, outed Russian illegals to U.S. intelligence in 2010.

***********************************************************************************************************************************

Chapter 17 - Showtime
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5of3IgWqb9A

When Platt returned to the U.S., he met with Mike Rochford.
In Moscow, Platt recounted he had met four or five former KGB types but one in particular, Aleksandr Shcherbakov, he thought might
interest Rochford.
The ex-KGB man was eager to come to the U.S. and find a business opportunity.
Platt also relayed his clear impression that Shcherbakov was hungry for money.
Rochford was pleased to hear the news.
Whether or not it might lead anywhere, another KGB man was almost within reach.
For Rochford it was as though a fly had unexpectedly flown into his spiderweb.
But a lot of preparations would have to be made.
First and foremost Rochford would have to come up with a plausible businessman who knew the art world well, and could talk convincingly about Russian artifacts.
He would also have to be a good actor and willing to pose as a potential buyer of Shcherbakov wears.
It was a tall order, but Rochford found the perfect businessman: an FBI special agent was a friend of William G. Stout, a member of the curatorial staff and registrar at the prestigious Frick Collection in New York.
By great good luck, as it happened, Stout had previously worked for the FBI for more than ten years.
With his FBI career long since passed, Stout, according, to Platt was somewhat reluctant at first to take on his unusual acting role.
But Platt had charmed and recruited a lot of agents in his career.
"I spent two days with him in New York," Platt said.
And he agreed.
Stout also got a green light from the FBI's New York field office.
Stout was more than qualified for what the FBI asked him to do.
He had an unusual background, combining the arts with law enforcement.
He had earned a bachelor's degree in international relations, Asian Studies, and classical history at Indiana University of Pennsylvania.
After college, he joined the FBI in 1974.
"I was a language specialist and supervisor," he said.
While at the FBI he was sent to the Defense Language Institute and earned another degree in Eastern European languages: Czech and
Slovak.
He left the FBI a decade later to go to graduate school at the Fashion Institute of Technology, where he received a master's degree in Museum Studies and decorative arts.
"After that I worked at the Getty as a fellow and then to Frick."
As registrar at the Frick he had a broad range of responsibilities, from working with the curators to supervising the care of exhibits. His adventure began when his FBI friend called him.
He said they were looking for someone from the New York art world to contact a Russian who wanted to sell art objects in America.
For Stout, the unexpected request from his friend was the beginning of a roller coaster ride in New York and Virginia with mysterious intelligence operatives who revealed very little about themselves.
"Very quickly my FBI agent friend and I were flown to Washington. We were picked up at the airport and driven somewhere. They never said where it was. Maybe Langley."
CIA headquarters.
"They went over what they were looking for me to do. They were not offering last names. A lot of first names," Stout said. 
They called me Bill.
But stout had worked on some espionage cases at the FBI, and knew better than to ask a lot of questions.
They sent out for pizza.
"I spent the night at a hotel somewhere in Virginia. The next day I was taken to the FBI field office at Buzzards Point in Washington. I wasn't aware of the importance of the case until I was there and was introduced to a higher level of agents. They briefed me on the procedure. My first action was to write a letter to this man in Russia. I was acting as a go between the Russian and my clients in New York, who I said were interested in Russian artifacts. If he could find the time, I would fly him over, give him a per diem, and discuss what he had to offer, and what I had to offer. I asked him to bring a sample." 
Stout wrote the letter on his personal letterhead with his New York home address.
He was careful not to use the Frick's letterhead that identified himself as the registrar at the Frick.
In Moscow, Shcherbakov was elated to receive Stout's letter.
His pleas to Platt had produced the invitation he so badly wanted.
He entreated Vasilenko to help him obtain a new passport, since his own had expired.
Vasilenko assisted him with the passport and other documents he would need.
When the paperwork was complete, Shcherbakov wrote back to stout, accepting the invitation.
"I received a reply from the Russian, and made a reservation for him at the Benjamin in Manhattan," Stout said.
The Benjamin, at 125 East 50th Street, describes itself as a luxury boutique hotel.
"I wrote again," Stout recalled, saying his plane ticket was waiting for him in Moscow at the airlines office.
In late June of 2000, Shcherbakov arrived in New York.
Stout was waiting for him in the lobby of the Benjamin.
He described his visitor in words that evoked his FBI training.
"I'm 6-foot-1, and he was shorter than me. Maybe 5'10", 185 pounds, brown hair. He wore a suit. He was pleasant looking, with a friendly face, no facial hair. He was personable. He knew his way around people. I was expecting a professional, and he fit the role. He wasn't flashy."
As Shcherbakov went upstairs to get settled, Stout walked outside to wait in a parked car with FBI agents.
He was back in the lobby when the Russian reappeared.
"He came back down with a shopping bag and we sat in the lobby in two armchairs. We exchanged cards. Mine said William G. Stout, Decorative Arts Specialist."
From the bag, Shcherbakov removed and carefully unwrapped several Pollock objects. 
A lot of faux Pollock pieces are sold in Russia, and Stout was taking no chances.
"I made him unpack them to be sure the pieces were real. He had a plate about eight inches high, with a hand-painted floral design. He also had an egg with a portrait of Christ. The egg was seven or eight inches tall, with flowers on the reverse side.
He also brought out three small boxes. All had narrative images from Russian folk stories and fairy tales. He said this was a sample of what he could sell. He asked me what would sell well in New York. He said he would ship items in the future. I told him if what he brought was a good indication, I thought we could do business successfully. I said I would talk to my clients, show them the samples and we would talk again while he was still in New York. He completely believed me. I gave him two envelopes: one was his per diem, and the
other was payment for the Pollack, about $1,000. I think we were going to see each other every day. I said goodbye to the Russian, took the shopping bag, and walked out to the parked car. I was taken back to the FBI office in the Federal Building near City Hall. They went over everything that had happened in minute detail. I left the Pollock pieces with them. I was thanked, and given a ride back to my apartment. I never saw the Russian again."
As far as Shcherbakov could tell, the man from the Frick had vanished into thin air when he walked out of the hotel lobby.
"I was called back to the New York field office about two weeks later. They thanked me, and that was it. Everybody was very happy. I played my role successfully."
Stout had done exactly what the FBI had asked him to do, and did it well.
He returned to his job at the Frick Collection, and kept secret his brief off-broadway acting career. 
The FBI, apparently adhering to a need-to-know policy, never revealed to Bill Stout what a crucial role he had played.
He was never told that he had helped to crack one of the most important espionage cases in the entire history of American intelligence.

Chapter 18 - I'll Have a Lobster 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A5mGxBTQQYQ

Aleksandr Shcherbakov left the hotel and strolled down the Avenue, enjoying the early summer weather in New York, and feeling
pretty good about himself.
The meeting could not have gone better.
He had finally established himself in the export business, and from what was said at the meeting, he had every reason to expect customers in New York, the very center of US commerce.
He had not walked very far, however, when he was approached by a stranger.
"Who are you?" Shcherbakov asked.
In reply, the stranger pulled out his business card.
It identified him as Mike Rochford, Federal Bureau of Investigation.
"I said, 'How are you?'" Rochford recounted. "'I knew you many years ago.' It was a lie. I never met him before in my life," Rochford said.
But counter-spies are not clergymen.
For many years, a framed quotation from Eric Ambler decorated the office wall of James Gear, the director of the FBI's Intelligence Division.
It read, in part, "I think if I were asked to single out one specific group of men one category as being the most suspicious, inhuman, sadistic, double-crossing set of bastards in any language, I would say, without hesitation, the people who run counterespionage departments."
Shcherbakov was deflated, but Rochford pressed on.
"Let's go have a drink," he said.
"I don't drink with strangers," the Russian replied.
"Okay," Rochford said. "You have a glass of water, I'll have a beer.
They walked back to Shcherbakov's hotel.
In the lobby, Shcherbakov demanded, "How do I know you are who you say you are?"
In reply, Rochford pulled out his official credential.
Shcherbakov got angry.
It was finally beginning to dawn on him that he'd been lured to New York and ensnared in a counterintelligence operation.
"You ruined my business opportunity," he protested.
"You set me up. I'm going to the security officer of the Russian Mission to the U.N., and you're going to wake up tomorrow and you will be on the front page of the New York Times."
"Don't flatter yourself," Rochford retorted. "You'll be lucky to get in a comic strip in The Washington Times."
Shcherbakov was furious.
"He's swearing at me in Russian," Rochford said, "and doesn't know I speak Russian.
Rochford tried to calm the Russian down.
"I said, 'I just want to help the US, and the result will make you the richest businessman in Russia.'"
That seemed to get the Russians attention.
"I have to be here for another couple of weeks," Rochford said.
He knew that his target wasn't going anywhere: the plane ticket that was sent to Shcherbakov had a return date two weeks later.
It was 11:30 a.m. 
The Russian didn't drink anything.
Rochford was finishing a beer.
"Only two people know I'm here," Rochford assured him. "Only the director of the CIA, and the director of the FBI."
"Bullshit," Shcherbakov said. "You probably have a whole team of people here."
He was right.
A large contingent of top counter-spies, as well as technical specialists, had accompanied Rochford to New York.
They included Carolyn Gwen-Fuller Deborah Evan-Smith, Jim Milburn, the Soviet analysts Dan Cloyd and Les Weiser, who found the post-it note that ended Aldrich Ames' spying career.
"You're probably recording everything," Shcherbakov said.
"I said, 'I'm not recording anything.'"
That was true, for the moment.
Rochford had booked a hotel not far from the Benjamin as his headquarters.
The FBI techs were set up in the room next to his, and ready to secretly record everything, if at some point Shcherbakov could be persuaded to meet in Rochefort's room.
Rochford asked the Russian if he had any money.
He said he didn't.
"I'll take you to dinner tonight," Rochford said.
"Will it be paid for by your director?" Shcherbakov asked.
Rochford said, "Yes."
"Good," Shcherbakov said. "I'll have a lobster."

Chapter 19 - Caviar and a Death Threat
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LUC6S1XnJsk

Rochford said he knew a great place nearby for dinner.
When they made arrangements to meet, Shcherbakov asked if Rochford minded if he brought someone else along.
"Sure, anyone you want," Rochford said.
"It will probably be the Security Director of the UN mission, the Russian said.
But Shcherbakov seemed to have thought better of his earlier threat to report the FBI approach to the U.N. Mission.
"He showed up alone, and he had a lot to drink," Rochford said.
The Russian was knocking back great quantities of Tullamore Dew, the blended Irish whiskey Rochford favoured.
He had a lobster.
At dinner, he got angry again, and started swearing, and complaining about Gorbachev.
"The Muslims will become terrorists without the Russians to hold them in check."
I was agreeing with him, whatever he said.
"The Soviet system is great, from a purely ideological point of view, you're right."
We did breakfast, lunch, and dinner for the next week and a half.
We talked about our families.
We had steps forward and steps back.
Still, the Russian had not offered any clue about a KGB source inside American intelligence.
But he confided startling information about something else.
It was after that first night when they met again that the Russian revealed he was under a death threat.
He was working for the Irkutsk mafia, he said, and they had arranged a caviar shipment to New York worth a million dollars.
But the caviar had spoiled enroute.
He was the middleman, and the Russian mobsters blamed him.
He owed them hundreds of thousands of dollars, they warned.
"Pay us the money," they told him, "or we will kill you."

Chapter 20 - Mr. Pym
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q9S91XQ_Klk

Aleksandr Shcherbakov was now, at least, in a dialogue with Mike Rochford, although, so far, he had continued to reveal nothing at all about an American mole working for Moscow.
To protect his identity, the FBI gave him a codename: Mr. Pym.
An FBI analyst was credited with coming up with the name.
Inspired by Magnus Pym, a British spy, double agent, and world-class betrayer, in John le Carre's novel "A Perfect Spy".
Gradually, Rochford established a rapport with Mr. Pym.
With the benefit of more Tullamore Dew, the volatile Russian began talking over lunch and dinner about things that had gone wrong in his personal life and his career.
He had held senior jobs in the KGB, and its successor, foreign intelligence agency, the SVR.
He had been Deputy Director of Directorate "S", which trained and inserted illegals in the U.S. and other countries.
But he complained bitterly about rampant corruption and favoritism in the KGB.
Alcoholics and friends of KGB were the ones who got promoted, he grumbled.
Rochford would light another cigar and just listen letting the Russian unburden himself.
What was clear Rochford said was that he hated that the United States had outspent Gorbachev in the Cold War, and that they lost.
He really believed theirs was a better society.
Invoking the motto of the KGB Rochford countered you are trying to protect the sword and shield of a society that no longer exists.
Sometimes, as they walked the streets of Manhattan, Mr. Pym ever the KGB man, would try to counter pitch Rochford.
He tried to turn the tables on the FBI agent and recruit him.
He pointed out attractive women and expensive cars.
If Rochford came to Russia he could have a car like that.
Rochford said thanks, but he liked the car he had.
By now, a fuller picture of Alexander Shcherbakov had emerged.
He was bitter at his former service, devastated at what had befallen his country.
The collapse of the Soviet Union, and frustrated at what had happened to him personally.
Here he was, a former senior KGB official, a deputy director of an important Directorate, no less.
With many years of loyal service to his country's premier intelligence agency, now broke, scrounging for business, trying to peddle painted boxes, and reduced to working for the Russian mob, which was threatening to kill him.
When Shcherbakov arrived in New York, besides hoping to set up a business to export artifacts, he planned to try to contact two shadowy Russians who were involved in the caviar deal.
He hoped they would pay him some of the money he owed to the Mafia.
But Rochford discouraged him from trying to contact the pair, whose names Mr. Pym disclosed in the hope that the FBI might help him
find them.
"You don't want to meet these guys," Rochford told him. "You're never going to see the money."
There was a reason that Rochford wanted to steer Shcherbakov away from the two Russians.
The FBI, once it learned their names, had contacted the Immigration Service, and obtained the I-94 forms that travelers coming to the U.S. have to fill out.
The FBI discovered the two men were already in trouble with the authorities for other shady dealings.
"Once we pulled the forms," an FBI source said, "we found they were already on the docket in New York. They were in the court system."
Any contact between Mr. Pym and the two Russians could only complicate Rockford's efforts. 
Although he had wined and dined Shcherbakov, and they were getting along better, the ex-KGB men had not produced any useful information in Rochford quest for the mole.
And Rochford was getting heavy pressure from his superiors in FBI headquarters in Washington to end his efforts in New York.
It was going nowhere, they said.
His quixotic 27 pitches to KGB agents had produced zilch, they reminded him.
He was wasting time and FBI resources, they said.
During his stay in New York with Mr. Pym, he continually had to fend off sniping from his colleagues at headquarters.
At some risk to his career, Rochford rejected the demand that he break off his meetings with Mr. Pym.
Perhaps the 28th spy would be the charm.

Chapter 21: I Have the File
youtube.com/watch?v=UliB3lAzt2U

They were back drinking in their usual bar, and it was near the end of the Russians stay in New York, when shcherbakov said, "I'll bet
you would like to know how a certain thing was compromised, and I can tell you who did it."
Rochford immediately guessed that Mr. Pym was talking about the eavesdropping tunnel under the Soviet embassy in Washington.
The FBI had begun to suspect the tunnel had been betrayed because it was producing little intelligence.
Rochford tried to look non-committal.
"Too late," the Russian said. "I can tell by your facial expression, you know what I mean. And if you give me ten million dollars, and certain guarantees, I can tell you about it."
"We shouldn't be talking about this stuff here," Rochford said. "Let's go up to my hotel room. If you come to the room, we can begin writing an agreement."
They had dinner, and the Russian continued drinking, but he agreed to meet at Rochford hotel in the morning.
When they reconvened in Rochford's room the next day, Shcherbakov hesitated.
"You're going to report me," he said.
He made it clear he was worried about security.
If Rochford reported to the FBI and the CIA what he revealed, the reports about him might leak back to the Russians.
"And I will die."
As an experienced intelligence professional, Mr. Pym knew that, of course, Rochford would have to report anything he said.
Besides, as he had suspected the FBI techs were set up in an adjoining room ready to tape and videotape their conversation.
"In the hotel room we began hammering out the details of what it would take," Rochford recounted. "Money, a house, taking care of
his extended family, and getting them all out of russia.
The ten million dollars that Mr. Pym had demanded was far beyond the one million in Rochford's budget.
But if headquarters backed him up, he realized he would have to negotiate an amount substantially larger than a million dollars.
The stakes were high.
The FBI and the CIA were desperate to uncover the mole who had been passing their most sensitive secrets to Moscow for years.
On the other hand, Mr. Pym might be running a scam.
Rochford would have to tread wearily.
Was the ex-KGB man trustworthy?
As Rochford's opening gambit: "I was adamant that we would only pay a million dollars. I told him I was representing both the
FBI director and the DCI the director of Central Intelligence."
(The formal name of the head of the CIA.)
Mr. Pym insisted on ten million.
The telephone rang.
It was Neal Gallagher, head of the FBI's Intelligence Division, asking, "Was this the real deal?"
Rochford assured him it was.
"I'm about to go in and see the director," Gallagher said.
He would brief Louis Freeh, the FBI chief, on the dramatic events in New York.
Rochford was way out on a very high limb, and it was a long way down if he was wrong.
Next, the CIA called.
"Minutes later, I got a call from Mike Sulick, again asking, 'Is this the real deal?' and I said, 'Yes.'"
Sulick, a street-smart New Yorker, was a veteran officer of the CIA's clandestine service.
If Rochford had hoped Mr. Pym would reveal the mole's name, he was disappointed.
The KGB had never learned the name of its premiere source inside U.S. intelligence.
The mole was careful never to reveal his identity.
In his communications with the KGB, he had signed his name "Ramon".
He never had a face-to-face meeting with a KGB officer.
But Mr. Pym promised to provide enough details that would lead the FBI to the anonymous mole.
"I don't care who he is," Mr. Pym said, "or which organization he's in, but I can give you things that will unbelievably open up your eyes."
He confirmed that the secret he had hinted at the previous night was, in fact, the eavesdropping tunnel under the Soviet embassy in Washington.
The mole had betrayed it to the KGB.
"It was, as we were negotiating the contract," Rochford recounted, "that he said, 'I have every detail of his interaction with us, from the time he volunteered to the time he stopped cooperating. I can give you every park, every signal site, every drop site.'"
Incredulous, Rochford asked, "How are you going to get that?"
"Don't worry. I have it," Shcherbakov replied. "I have the file."
It was as though Mr. Pym set off a bomb in the hotel room.
Rochford was stunned.
The FBI agents listening in the next room could hardly believe their ears.
When Shcherbakov first arrived in New York, Rochford and his team had hoped the former KGB man might provide some leads to their sources identity.
They never dreamed he might have the mole's actual KGB file.
Shcherbakov was high enough in the KGB to have access to the file.
Still it appeared that Mr. Pym had performed a feat that seemed impossible on the face of it.
How could he have walked out of the KGB carrying a large file on the spy agency's most important U.S. asset?
The answer he explained was that he had removed the contents of the file piecemeal, over time.
He did not need to remove the actual FBI documents that the mole had given to the KGB.
Instead, Mr. Pym explained he had painstakingly copied into a notebook the titles of all the documents the source had provided.
The FBI would not need the actual documents, because once it had the material from the KGB file, and his notebook, it could match the titles he had copied with the original documents in the FBI's files.
The file also contained crucial physical evidence, which Mr. Pym had taken, but he was not ready to talk about that yet.
Also in the file he had assembled was a detailed record of all of the moles dead drops, the dates, and locations.
Shcherbakov had copied them as well into the notebook that he smuggled out of the KGB.
The file even contained drafts of letters that Shcherbakov had written to the unknown source.
He wrote multiple drafts, an FBI man said, to make sure that the tone was right, that they were not being arrogant, or ordering him what to do.
The KGB was handling their spy with kid gloves because he was emotional, extremely demanding, and finicky about how the Russians were running him.
Why did he steal the contents of the file?
"I don't know," Rochford said. 
I asked him that a couple of times.
He said, "You never know your life situation where you might need some insurance. I have to bring in my partner from the CIA," Rochford said.
He declined to name him, but other sources familiar with the Mr. Pym operation said he was Leonard Bellegarde, Rochford's closest friend in the CIA.
They had worked together on counterintelligence cases for years. 
Bellegarde, a seasoned clandestine officer, was fluent in Russian, and had served all over the world: in Mexico, St. Petersburg, Geneva, Sweden, and Paris.
Rochford was flying solo, and wanted him in New York for backup.
As the negotiation dragged on, it became increasingly clear to Rochford that he would have to raise the ante.
For his part, Mr. Pym realized he was not going to get ten million dollars for the file.
Finally, they settled on a payment to Shcherbakov of seven million dollars.
It was by far the largest amount ever paid by American intelligence agencies to a source.
Aleksandr Shcherbakov had made history.
He was the seven million dollar spy.
The contract also provided all the other guarantees Mr. Pym demanded, including resettlement in the U.S. and protection by the CIA and the FBI.
As part of the agreement, Mr. Pym stipulated that the intelligence agencies, in addition to offering him safe haven, also arranged to bring out members of his extended family, not including his former wife.
But Rochford was not about to promise him millions of dollars for a pig in a poke.
Tthe FBI would have to see the file before Mr. Pym received the money.
The Russian, however, would not agree to return to Moscow to retrieve the file without a payment up front.
Now a new negotiation opened between the FBI and the CIA.
The two agencies dickered over the size of the up-front payment, and who would provide it.
After considerable back-and-forth, it was agreed that Mr. Pym would receive a down payment of seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars.
The CIA agreed to provide the money.
"The key was that he could take the seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars, and pay off the Mafia," Rochford said.
Clearly, it was a big part of Mr. Pym's incentive to make a deal.
Shcherbakov had squirreled away the file for five years, but only now was willing to sell it.
Like a lot of former KGB men, Aleksandr Shcherbakov tried his hand at business, but was unsuccessful.
He was not the only ex-KGB officer to become entangled with the Russian mob.
Many former spies, cast adrift by the collapse of the Soviet system and the country's economic woes, and desperate to make a living, turned to the criminal elements in Russian society.
The former agents, after all, had skills that were useful to the Mafia.
So it was not surprising that Shcherbakov services were engaged by the Russian mob, which had its tentacles almost everywhere, from money laundering to extortion to ordinary business activity.
Soon he became involved with the Irkutsk mafia and the caviar deal that ended with the death threat.
For the CIA and the FBI, the large down payment was a huge risk, of course. 
All Rochford had was Mr. Pym's promises that he could produce the KGB file on the mole.
Perhaps there was no file, and Shcherbakov simply planned to take the money and run.
Rochford drew up the contract with Mr. Pym.
Several times he broke off to consult with his team of counterintelligence agents next door.
When it was done it was sent to FBI and CIA headquarters for final approval.
"We faxed everything back to headquarters by secure fax," Rochford said.
Washington agreed to the terms.
If Mr. Pym's file led to the capture of the mole, the FBI would pay half of the seven million dollars.
The CIA agreed, after deducting the upfront money, to pay the other half.
Before Mr. Pym headed back to Moscow, Rochford said, "Wee showed him the upfront money. We said it will be made safe for you. We would put it in the bank and set up so you can get it as a business account.
Mr. Pym wanted to take the cash with him.
We pointed out he could take it, but he would be caught trying to bring it back into Russia.
Shcherbakov agreed to leave the money in the bank account.
Now, the seven million dollar spy would have to produce what he promised.

Chapter 22 - The Band Was Playing
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cA_l-47NB2Y

The KGB file was in Moscow, which meant the CIA would have to run a high risk operation to get it out.
The operational plan called for Mr. Pym to retrieve the file from its hiding place and pass it to the CIA.
This was no simple undertaking.
When the KGB was dismantled in 1991, a month before the collapse of the Soviet Union, its successor agency in the Russian Federation was divided into two parts: the SVR, responsible for foreign spying, and the FSB, which handled internal security and surveillance.
In Moscow, the FSB took over the job of the KGB's former second chief Directorate.
With heavy FSB surveillance of CIA officers operating out of the American Embassy in Moscow, the handoff had to take place with extreme caution.
Under no circumstances could either Mr. Pym, or the CIA officer who met him clandestinely, be caught in the act.
And the FSB had eyes everywhere.
Espionage is not all James Bond glamour.
The KGB man had hidden the file in his mother's garage.
It had been sitting in that prosaic hiding place for five years.
Elaborate detailed arrangements were made so that the file could safely be extracted from its hiding place, passed to the CIA, and sent on its way to FBI headquarters in downtown Washington.
The first task of the CIA officer designated to meet Mr. Pym was to evade surveillance.
The officer might "dry clean" himself by driving around the streets of Moscow for hours to try to throw off any followers.
He might switch cars, or go on foot part of the time, ducking in and out of department stores and alleyways.
A more elaborate trick the CIA sometimes used was to have the clandestine officer switch places with someone in the embassy, perhaps a low-level employee, even a workman whom the FSB agents did not ordinarily bother to follow.
The CIA officer would be dressed like the other employee, and a skilled makeup artist would change his face to closely resemble his double.
The plan called for the handoff to take place in Moscow on August 4th, 2000. 
If for any reason it failed, Mr. Pym and his CIA contact were to try again one month later on September 4th.
Their work done, Rochford suggested it was time to celebrate.
The FBI agent and Mr. Pym had been together in New York for two weeks.
It was almost the July 4th holiday.
To Rochford it seemed an appropriate date to party.
The file, the key to his long pursuit of the mole, was almost within his grasp.
For their celebration Rochford and Mr. Pym went out on a dinner boat on the Hudson River.
They could finally relax after all the tension.
It was a perfect night for a cruise.
Once aboard, they toasted each other.
"I will be a very rich businessman," the Russian said, "and you will become a general."
Mr. Pym, apparently, did not realize that, unlike the KGB, FBI agents do not have military rank.
The band was playing loudly, so none of the other passengers on the boat could hear what the Russian and his friend were saying.

Chapter 23 - Who Is Mr. Pym
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dTdZkMRfgFo

When Aleksandr Shcherbakov arrived in the United States in the summer of 1981, with his wife Malvina, he was not yet thirty, a very junior KGB counterintelligence officer in the Soviet embassy in Washington.
He served in the embassy for four years, until May 1985, at first undercover, with the title of third secretary and vice consul. 
Near the end of his tour he was upgraded to second Secretary and Consul.
Valentin Alekseyenko, a senior KGB spy in the embassy, knew Shcherbakov, and overlapped with him for several months from August 1981 to the following summer.
"I knew him," he said. "He was in KR, counterintelligence. I was PR, political intelligence. He was a novice in the station. He was a newcomer. It was his first foreign tour, as far as I remember. He did not do any spectacular work. His wife was unusual, because she was from a national minority in Russia. He was a lean guy. His voice was penetrating, and he was good in one-on-one conversation. He was very polite, showed respect to older people. He tried to keep good relations with everyone. He knew how to get along. In those days, Yakushkin was still the resident. In a kind of inverse logic, Shcherbakov, although a very junior officer, was assigned to the most difficult targets. Penetration into the CIA and FBI was next to impossible," Alekseyenko said. "Shcherbakov, being younger, would have CIA and FBI targets. Because there were low expectations of success, the targets were the least important." According to Alekseyenko, "The important targets were the White House State, the Pentagon, the military industrial complex, and NSA. Mine was the White House."
While in the Washington rezidentura, Shcherbakov played a minor supporting role in the John Walker case.
John A. Walker, Jr. headed a family ring of Navy spies who sold U.S. Navy codes to the KGB.
Walker had spied for the KGB for 18 years.
He recruited his son, Michael, and brother, Arthur, and a close friend, Jerry A. Whitworth, to help him.
Walker was arrested in May 1985, pleaded guilty, and was sentenced to life in prison.
He died there in 2014 at age 77.
On May 19th, Walker had left a 7-up can as a signal to the Russians near Poolesville, Maryland, a rural area outside of Washington, DC. Aleksei G. Tkachenko, Walker's KGB case officer, was spotted in the area.
Walker left a shopping bag full of 129 classified Navy documents on a country road nearby.
Hours later, on May 20th, 1985, the FBI arrested Walker in the middle of the night at a motel in Maryland.
A few days later, on May 23rd, Shcherbakov and two other Soviet embassy employees escorted Tkachenko, his wife, Olga, and two daughters to National Airport.
The Tkachenko's boarded a plane to Montreal, and then an Aeroflot flight to Moscow.
They seemed to have left in a hurry.
The FBI found a half-cooked hamburger in a frying pan on the stove.
His tour over, Shcherbakov went back to Moscow in 1985, the same year that half-a-dozen espionage cases, including Walker's spy ring, exploded in the U.S.
Back at KGB headquarters, Shcherbakov's star rose quickly.
His mentor and protector, his hosyin, was Victor Adrianov, the chief of the American Department of Directorate K, the KGB's counterintelligence arm at headquarters.
In the lexicon of the KGB, when officers in Directorate K were assigned overseas, they were said to work in line KR, or counterintelligence.
It was there in the counter intelligence Directorate at KGB headquarters that Shcherbakov had intimate access to the file of the unidentified mole inside U.S. intelligence.
But unknown to his SVR superiors, Shcherbakov meticulously and secretly copied into his personal notebook all of the titles of the documents the mole had provided to Moscow.
In his tiny handwriting, it was all there.
Every detail.
Later, his mentor, Andrianov, became head of Directorate "S", which trained illegals to be sent abroad.
And he brought Shcherbakov with him.
As Shcherbakov rows within the hierarchy, he became a colonel and deputy director of the illegals Directorate.
He was on the list to be promoted to general, but Shcherbakov had other plans.
He left the SVR in 1995, removing the rest of the file that would make him a millionaire and headed for his mother's garage.
His colleague Valentin Alekseyenko, had worked as a senior officer in the Washington residency of the KGB for six years before he returned to Moscow in 1982.
In 1993, he agreed to help Yuri B. Shvetz another former KGB agent write a book on Shvet's experiences in the Washington rezidentura.
Shvetz had been posted to Washington for two years in the mid-1980s undercover as a TASS correspondent.
Both men later emigrated to the United States.
In the summer of 1999, Shcherbakov had approached Alekseyenko for his help on a business deal.
Shcherbakov was in Moscow and contacted Alekseynko at his home in the U.S.
Shcherbakov talked enthusiastically about exporting rugs, caviar, and artifacts.
They exchanged faxes, but the business arrangement they entered into did not produce results.
It seemed to be how all of Shcherbakov ventures ended.
A year later, Shcherbakov was lured to New York and met Bill Stout to talk about exporting artifacts.
Then Stout vanished, and Mike Rochford appeared in his place.
To the FBI, Shcherbakov was now Mr. Pym.
Although he was furious at first at having been tricked, it was after several days in New York that Mr. Pym finally decided he had something far more valuable to sell than little wooden boxes decorated with Russian fairy tales.

Chapter 24 - Trouble in Moscow
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7UI7OcydsRY

As month went by, and the news from the CIA's Moscow station was not at all good.
Mr. Pym had failed to show up for the August 4th meeting.
Rochford was concerned but, tried to comfort himself by thinking of several possible explanations.
Perhaps there had been a missed signal.
Rochford knew how difficult it was to operate inside the Russian capital, under the noses of the FSB.
Perhaps the CIA officer was unable to dry clean himself satisfactorily, and had aborted their scheduled meeting. 
Perhaps Shcherbakov, a trained counterintelligence officer, had broken off contact if he believed he may have spotted surveillance near the CIA man, as the officer neared the site for the handoff.
Or, Shcherbakov may have gotten cold feet.
He was taking a huge risk.
If something went wrong, he would be arrested and imprisoned, if not worse.
He had access to his big upfront payment, which had been deposited in a business account.
Had he decided to take the money and flee?
Not for the first time, the thought crossed Rochford's mind that perhaps there never was a file, and it was all a scam.
If so, Rochford knew he had better prepared to look for work in the private sector.
His future as an FBI counter-spy was on the line.
His concern turned to intense alarm when Mr. Pym failed to show for the September 4th backup meeting. 
Clearly the operation was in big trouble.
Rochford managed to send word to Shcherbakov: "Come back. We need to talk."
In late September, Mr. Pym arrived in New York, again to be met by a relieved Mike Rochford.
At least the Russian had not disappeared.
At the same time, Rochford was both worried and angry.
"Alex," he asked, "what the hell happened?" 
Mr. Pym was evasive, but as Rochford listened to his excuses he concluded that he had been hiding from the Irkutsk mafia the whole time. 
Facing a death threat, he apparently holed up in his apartment for almost three months, fearing to set foot outside.
It was the only explanation that made sense.
But it meant that the operation to find the mole had now been unexpectedly derailed by the Russian mob.
It was a bizarre twist and threatened to destroy Rochford's years of patient work.If Mr. Pym failed to show for the handoff a third time, the naysayers at FBI headquarters would have a field day at Rochford's expense. 
The stakes were made clear to Mr. Pym: the sooner he passed the file to the CIA and Moscow, the sooner he could return to the U.S., collect the rest of his seven million, and remain in the US for good.
Once safely back on American soil, the CIA and FBI would protect him from both the Irkutsk killers and the SVR.
Mr. Pym agreed to return to Moscow, and he promised to hand over the file on November 4th.

Chapter 25  The Voice of the Mole
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3f-_dgqSppM

On November 4th, after two failed efforts in Moscow, the third attempt to obtain the file was successful.
As Mr. Pym had promised, he showed up at the designated rendezvous, and handed over the file.
The precious file arrived in Washington in several carefully-wrapped packages, enough to fill a medium-sized suitcase.
It was guarded every step of the way from on its secret journey from Moscow to the FBI.
Mr. Pym had insisted that one package be marked DO NOT OPEN, and that it be held until he himself was safely out of Moscow.
The FBI did not know why Shcherbakov had mysteriously marked the package this way.
Although the counterintelligence agents were itching to see what was inside, it was decided to abide by his instructions.
The mystery package was not opened.
In less than two weeks, they knew, the Russian would come out of Moscow and explain the contents.
The file contained the all-important notebook in which Shcherbakov had copied all of the mole's dealing with the KGB, and later the SVR, over a period of ten years.
While the agents waited for Mr. Pym to arrive, there was work to be done.
At the FBI laboratory on the third floor of FBI headquarters, the techs began a detailed forensic examination of the file.
The contents were carefully dusted for fingerprints, but there were no useful prints.
In addition, every document, message, letter, and envelope was photographed.
There were translations needed, because much of the material was in Russian.
Shcherbakov had managed to compile an inventory and description in Russian of every document -- 6,000 pages in all -- that had been passed to Moscow by the mole.
The list would have to be translated back into English.
The file included the communications exchanged by the mole and the Russians over the course of ten years, and the titles of the documents he had given to the KGB.
But the detailed notes taken by Shcherbakov described them in sufficient detail, so that the FBI could retrieve them from its own files, as well as in some cases, from the files of the NSA and the CIA.
The counterintelligence agents then began the painstaking job of matching the titles of the documents in Shcherbakov's notebook with the originals in the FBI files.
A preliminary look at the files offered some tantalizing clues to the identity of the mole, but nothing conclusive.
More was needed.
Next, FBI analysts began a thorough examination of the file, searching for clues that would confirm the identity of the mole at last.
The letters and contents nowhere identified the mole by name or by organization.
He was referred to as "Ramon", or "B", or "Ramon Garcia".
Nevertheless, the counterintelligence agents believed that Gray Deceiver, the CIA officer Brian Kelley, would soon be arrested.
Ten days after handing the file to the CIA, the seven million dollar spy made it back to the U.S. for the last time.
On November 14th, Mr. Pym was in Washington, meeting with Rochford and other FBI counterintelligence agents.
As instructed, the FBI had not opened the envelope marked DO NOT OPEN.
"Now," Shcherbakov said. "Open it. There's a fingerprint of your guy on a bag, and a voice recording."
It was 14 years earlier, in 1986, that the unidentified mole had given the KGB the number of a pay phone in Northern Virginia that he arranged to call at an agreed time. 
On August 18th, unknown to the mole, the KGB agent who answered recorded part of their conversation.
Now, the FBI had the tape.
The Russians had kept everything, even one of the plastic trash bags that the mole had used to wrap the documents that he left for the KGB in dead drops around Washington.
Mr. Pym explained how he came to possess the bag inside the mystery package.
In addition to the tape recording, was an ordinary black plastic trash bag, of the kind that suburban homeowners used to dispose of leaves or garbage.
When Hanson filled a dead drop, he would wrap the documents and disks in a plastic trash bag and tape it up to waterproof it, and protect it from the elements.
Then he would wrap the whole package in a second plastic bag.
Under normal procedure, Mr. Pym said someone else opened the bags.
He would then receive a pile of documents that had been handled first by others.
Only once did they drop off the outer bag with the documents.
He said when he removed the outer bag, he assumed that the only person who had touched the inner bag was himself and Ramon.
So he carefully put the inner bag in an envelope.
The plastic bag was to prove one of the two crucial items in the file that Shcherbakov removed from the KGB's first chief Directorate, it's foreign espionage arm.
The other was the tape recording.
The bag was sent to the FBI lab to check for fingerprints, but the bag would have to be handled with extreme care, and processing it for prints was going to take a while.
In the meantime, Rochford, with two colleagues Michael Waguespack and Tim Bereznay, turned to a room in the basement of the FBI to listen to the tape.
Waguespack, known as Wagues, grew up in the Cajun country near New Orleans, and was regarded as one of the best counterintelligence agents in the FBI.
Bereznay a was also an experienced counterintelligence agent, and a section chief at FBI headquarters.
Now, at last, Rochefort was sure the fate of Gray Deceiver, Brian Kelley, was sealed.
The FBI counterintelligence agents were still convinced that the CIA officer was the mole.
As the FBI agents settled back to listen, they were sure they were about to hear the voice of Brian Kelley.
The tape rolled, and the FBI agents could hardly wait to hear it.
The long mole hunt was about to be over.
To their utter consternation, the voice that boomed out from the speakers was not that of Brian Kelley.
The agents were stunned and chagrined at the unexpected turn of events.
Three years lost.
All that effort, and now, just as Rochford was sure that the mole was within his grasp, the shocking revelation: on a 14-year old snippet of magnetic tape that the bureau had been chasing the wrong man.
Brian Kelley was innocent.
His career at the CIA had suffered great damage that could not be undone and repaired.
But if the voice on the tape was not Brian Kelley, then who was it?
Waguespack recalled his frustration.
"I kept listening, and I said, 'I know that voice. The inflection. I know that voice, but I can't put it with anybody. That voice sounds familiar. We broke off that day, still unsure."

Chapter 26: Oh, My God!
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U28glpXzDp8

There had been a big meeting at the FBI's Washington field office to try to figure out the voice on the tape, but it reached no conclusion.
Afterwards, Bob King and Jim Milburn, the FBI's two veteran Soviet analysts, were walking back together to headquarters.
The more he looked at the case, Milburn said, the more he thought the mole worked for the FBI, not the CIA.
Not only that, Milburn concluded from the contents of the file that the mole served in an FBI analytical unit, not one of the operational divisions.
And most of the material in the file dealt with the Soviets.
Jim suddenly wrote on a tiny piece of paper: "Hanssen?" 
King firmly disagreed.
"I said, 'There's just no way. He has a wife and kids, and he's more Catholic than the Pope. Hanssen just did not fit the profile of a mole. I'd met his family and several of his children. I'd been to his house.'"
The two analysts had come to know Hanssen well when he supervised the mole study the three had conducted to see if older FBI cases might provide clues to the current traitor.
Hanssen did seem notably religious.
The analysts knew he slipped off to Mass almost every day.
Back at headquarters, after the short walk from the field office, King and Milburn adjourned to their office in the vault, a v-shaped windowless storage room on the fourth floor that had been converted to a secure office.
The door could only be opened by a digital combination lock.
Sensitive materials were kept in a safe, inside the vault, and mole investigations were run there.
It was out of the way on an inside corridor, which had the added advantage of shielding it from the questions of other counterintelligence agents, curious about what was going on in the vault.
The two analysts talked over what was known so far.
The voice on tape was still a mystery.
Mr. Pym did not know his identity, but had offered some additional fragments.
"Before he brought out the file from Moscow," King said, "he had already told us some things tidbits that were in it. One tidbit only added to the puzzle. When the Russians asked for the name of someone whom they could approach as a possible recruitment, the mole offered up the name of Jack Horschauer."
The name initially did not ring a bell with either analyst.
"Who was Jack Horschauer?" Milburn asked.
King thought back to the time that he and Milburn had worked on the study of past efforts to penetrate the FBI. 
Twelve years earlier, for several months in 1988, the two analysts and their supervisor had worked on the mole study in room 4835, a cramped cubicle at headquarters.
The supervisor was Robert Hanssen.
"Hanssen had often referred to his friend, Jack, from Germany," King remembered. "He was always talking about Jack from Germany. At some point, he must have mentioned Jack's last name."
King had also seen the report that Jack Horschauer's name had been offered by the mole as someone the KGB might try to recruit.
At the time, Jack Horschauer was married and living in Germany.
He had commanded an air infantry company in Vietnam, served with the Special Forces in Germany for three years, and then as a military attache in the American Embassy in Bonn.
He retired from the service in 1994.
But none of that explained why an obscure retired Army lieutenant colonel had been singled out by the mole.
In the course of their discussion about Horschauer, and when Milburn asked, "Who is Jack Horschauer?" the answer emerged.
King realized now that Jack from Germany and Jack Horschauer were the same person.
King remembered the electric moment when the truth dawned on both of them in unison.
"We said, 'Oh, my god.'"
The two analysts had a copy of the tape in the vault.
Quickly, they spun the dial on the old-fashioned Mosler safe, pulled out the tape, and listened to it again.
Recognizing the voice before had been extremely difficult because, the tape was only two minutes long, and the mole whispered some of the time.
Without any context, identifying one voice from what might be tens of thousands was challenging.
Moreover, on the tape, the mole spoke only 41 words, along with several grunts and uh-huh's.
But the last time Milburn and King heard the tape, they had not figured out who Jack Horschauer was.
It made their task of voice recognition exponentially easier.
Now they knew the voice on the tape.
"That's Hanssen," King said.

[Excerpt]

Chapter 29 - America 101
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YZvMxzBcfkU

Unlike most defectors, Aleksandr Shcherbakov, Mr. Pym, was guarded by the CIA after he defected in 2000. 
That precaution was necessary. 
The KGB was furious at him, since the file he purloined led directly to the capture of Robert Hansen, Moscow's longest-running source inside U.S. intelligence.
But Mr. Pym has a new name and identity.
He is safe from both the KGB and the Irkutsk mafia.
The CIA understandably would not talk at all about his whereabouts and his new life in America, but officials confirmed that he lives somewhere in the United States, and is well protected and rich.
