May 9th, 2019
Steele-Kavalec notes taken during a meeting on 10/11/2016
https://www.scribd.com/document/409363897/State-Department-handwritten-notes-of-meeting-with-Christopher-Steele
https://www.scribd.com/document/409364009/Kavalec-Less-Redacted-Memo

--- PAGE ONE ---
Orbis J. Winer 10/11/16
Chris Steele 12/16
Russia - Ukraine
Source network in Russia
Glenn Simpson - WSJ sources
Intermediary - Peter Fritsch editor
May-June - Trump-Putin
Ritz-Carlton
Rybolovlev T
Rybolovlev sale
Sourcing complicated
H-L ["hotline"] in Kremlin, once removed
not sure where going, or how used
[Redacted]
- online - computer ex[pert]
Spectrum Health Care - Trump
UGT [University of Georgia Tech?]-alfa-group
23/26 Sept Collusion
Saw changes at Spectrum after inquired of alfa


--- PAGE TWO ---
- info exchange last 5 years
- cited as example as pattern of behavior
Sergei Millian claims to have signed contract w/Trump
having used kompromat -
agreed on info exchange without use
of kompromat
July
Trubnikov [source]
Surkov [source]
Very significant network in
U.S., via emigres, recruitment at DNC
pay using pension fund for services
- human and technical in US or Russia
- op run by Kremlin, not FSB
Ivanov, Peskov (HRC dossier), Putin


--- PAGE THREE ---
Ivanov claims could use it
others argued against it
Leaked all best stuff
Will be more, no killer
June - reporting started
NYT and WaPo have
Entity - was hacked by R[ussia]
3 distinct channels
Alfa-Trump-Kremlin-comms
Millian-Kukes
Carter Page - changes RNC
platform - secret meting with Sechin
Igor Divyekin - ex IO [intelligence officer] tied Ivanov to Peskov
2 secret meetings - kompromat
Manafort


--- PAGE FOUR ---
Buyer's remorse
Spectrum health unwitting
Emigre - network - hacking and recruiting
Manfort - key player -Paige - not family
Sergei Millian - new in CHina - emgigre - American - is he alive?
Lesin
Putin mistress Kabayeva
Lesin saw chance to knife her out of company
Aven 
$4b not invested in Russia makes him vulnerable 
TNK
Putin - oil for food 
Aven minister trade at time
100m
has goods on Pu[tin]


--- PAGE FIVE ---
Trump get [Redacted]
month waited before replied
$100m owed to Russians by Manafort
Chris Steele
Tatyana Duran
Link to Glenn Simpson Client
Managing
Client needs
FBI
WashPo/NYT
Source protection


--- PAGE SIX ---
plant in DNC
Russian emigre person
DNCs
Millian
Out of Russia
Cyber criminals


--- PAGE SEVEN ---
Doug Lute [U.S. Deputy National Security Advisor for Iraq and Afghanistan, May 2007-Sep 2013; U.S. Ambassador to NATO, Sep 2013-Jan 2017]
- targeted set of points for NAC [North Atlantic Council]
FAC [House Foreign Affairs Committee] - Russia convo - should not be difficult
Sharing with IC
3 lines of effort
Cyber Collections
hackers out of Russia
active in U.S. pension fund
Miami - consulate payment
implants
operatives
Page, Millian (emigre?), Manafort


--- PAGE EIGHT ---
Winer
Catherine Belton FT
London writing
shut down operation
Roger Stone - Podesta
Wikileaks
DC Sunday
Multi-lat J/C [Joint Chiefs?]
get paper
no time limit
Pentagon non-concurred
72-hour limit
SD [State Dept] said no
Pentagon going to Geneva
London outcomes paper
List of folks going to Geneva
all except Iranians sending people


--- PAGE NINE ---
Jonathan
-Kulagin left in Aug set
ups real estate entities used
for massive # of purchases
by Russians
set up espionage network
in Florida - to buy a lot of perpetuitites for POTUS businesses
though a R[ussian] brokerage 
f[?]
100's of real estate transactions
1990's
Browder
set any price for a unit
to hold it - no due diligence
set up by gvt officials
Domestic espionage
funding oligarch + getting him out


--- PAGE TEN ---
Kulagin withdraw from DC
involved in
emigre pension system
Russian Kulagin
worked in embassy
Roubeul [sp?] pol officer
Per Lithuanian dip[lomatic] moves to DC (was
Global Group 2000 LLC
Current registered agent
Mikhail Kulagin
Abenshura, Florida
Florida Best Realty
Marat Zitsbank
Located in Trump Towers
Real estate vendors of sales
125 of Russians
Reuters story today
703 of 2044 are LLC
zip code - 1200 R-born residents


--- PAGE ELEVEN ---
Vadim Gataullin
63 individuals
$98m in 7 towers
Validates work of CS
Daily Beast
BBC Reuters, Global Witness
Zitsbank - never heard of Global Group (photo w/Trump)
Mikhail Kulagin in U.S.
Guardian story on Rybolovlev - flying
Cohen - Prague
Flying - late July early August
August 18




Notes from Meeting with Chris Steele and Tatyana Duran of Orbis Security, October 11, 2016

Background: Orbis undertook the investigation into the Russia/Trump connection at the
behest of an institution he declined to identify that had been hacked. The institution
approached them based on the recommendation of Glenn Simpson and Peter Fritch (specialists
in economic crime, formerly of the WSj) and is keen to see this information come to light prior
to November 8. Orbis undertook the investigation in June of 2016. [REDACTED]

Steele indicated they are tracking these Russian lines of effort:

1. Contact between Trump -- via Manafort -- and the Kremlin that go back to about
2013, about the time he took Miss Universe to Moscow. Steele stressed that while
Trump was filmed engaged in compromising activities with prostitutes in the Ritz
Carlton, the Russians have not needed to use that "kompromat" on him as he was
already interested in cooperation. (Steele said he is persuaded the story about the
prostitutes is accurate because they had their source speak with hotel contacts who
confirmed 1) that the FSB was in the hotel while Trump was there and 2) Trump 
regularly availed himself of prostitues while in Moscow.) Steele indicated that this
operation is run by the Kremlin -- former Kremlin COS Sergey Ivanov, Dmitriy Peskov
and PResident Putin -- and not the FSB. PResidential Advisor Vladislov Surkov and 
Vyacheslov Trubnikov (former head of Russian External Intelligence Service - SVR) are
also involved. Manafort has been the go-between with the campaign. Ivanov
persuaded Putin it was possible to use the hacked information and run an operation
without being detected, while others argued against it. Ivanov was demoted after the
hacking became known and no there is "buyer's remore." [REDACTED]
there is panic in the Kremlin about the operation. There
was speculation that Lavrov might be targeted as another fall person. Peter Aven of Alfa
Bank has been the conduit for secret communications between the Kremlin and
Manafort; messages are encrypted via TOR software and run between a hidden server
managed by Alfa Bank (see separate paper on this channel). Aven is reportedly
vulnerable to pressure from Putin because he has declined to repatriate $4B in funds he
took out of Russia. (Steele said Aven's contacts with Putin go back to St. Petersburg, 
when Putin made $100M in the oil-for-food business while Aven was Minister of Foreign
Trade.) Manafort is vulnerable because he owes $100M to the Russians. Carter Paige is
involved, and he had two secret meetings with Rosneft Chairman Igor Sechin in Moscow
earlier this year. Steele says U.S. congressional contacts confirmed Paige was involved
in the effort to have the Republican playform changed with respect to Ukraine/lethal
weapons. Steele noted that according to their source, while there will continue to be
leaks of DNC material, "all the best stuff" has already been leaked and there will not be
any bombshells coming.
2. There is a technical/human operation run out of Moscow targeting the election. There
is a significant Russian network in the U.S. run by the Russian Embassy that draws on
emigres to do hacking and recruiting. This operation involved Russian Embassy officer
Mikhail Kalugin, who was quickly pulled out of the U.S. this summer when the hacking
scandal broke. Kalugin was replaced with Andrey Bondarev. Payments to those
recruited are made out of the Russian Consulate in Miami. (Comment: As of late
September 2016, according to DHS electronic records, Mikhail Kalugin did not appear to be in
the U.S. His travel history indicates he arrived in the U.S. at Dulles airport on April 4, 2016 and
departed at Dulles airport on August 18, 2016. [REDACTED]
Andrey Bondarev appeared to be in the country as of late September 
2016. Bondarev's most recent I-94 indicates he arrived on August 29, 2016 at Dulles
airport. It is important to ntoe that there is no Russian Consulate in Miami. End
comment.)
3. The Russians have succeeded in placing an agent inside the DNC.
4. Steele also mentioned an emigre Amcit by the name of Serge Millian who may be 
involved in some day. (according to the Financial Times (FT), Millian is head of the
Russian-American Chamber of Commerce). Steele noted Millian had left the U.S. and
seemed to have disappeared. (Comment: According to FT, Millian's organization said
in 2009 it had "signed formal agreements with the Trump Organization" to service
Russian real estate clients, but the Trump Organization denied any connections. Per
Steele, Millian is connected to Simon Kukes (who took over management of Yukos when
Khodorkovsky was arrested.) N.B. I've seen press reports that Kukes recently donated a
large amount of money to the Trump campaign

On a separate note, Orbis has information suggesting Lesin was killed accidentally. Reportedly
Lesin was trying to push Putin's mistress Kubayeva out of Gazprom Media, and someone was
sent to warn him off. They did not mean to kill him, but things got out of hand.
