Feb 27, 2010
ASIO in fresh Israel spy probe
theage.com.au/world/asio-in-fresh-israel-spy-probe-20100226-p949.html

ASIO is investigating at least three dual Australian-Israeli citizens whom it suspects of using Australian cover to spy for Israel.
The investigation was under way at least six months before the assassination in January of Hamas operative Mahmoud al-Mabhouh, now widely believed to have been carried out by the Israeli foreign intelligence service Mossad.
Authorities in Dubai have revealed that three people suspected of involvement in the assassination were travelling on forged Australian passports, using the names of three dual Australian-Israeli citizens.
The three people linked to Mabhouh's death are in no way connected to the three being investigated by ASIO.
Australia has confronted Israel for a second time on the use of the forged Australian passports, with the acting ambassador in Tel Aviv, Nicoli Maning-Campbell, conveying the government's concerns to officials in Israel.
The Australian Federal Police is investigating the affair, along with ASIO and the Australian Passport Office.
Meanwhile, in New York, Australia was last night preparing to abstain in a United Nations vote on a new resolution urging Israel and the Palestinian Authority to investigate allegations of war crimes committed during last year's war in Gaza.
The UN General Assembly was expected to vote on the resolution early this morning.
Allegations of war crimes committed by Israel and Hamas were raised in a special United Nations report by South African Justice Richard Goldstone.
Australia voted against a similar resolution that was brought before the UN General Assembly last year.
The Rudd government has warned Israel that forging Australian passports would not be regarded as ''the act of a friend''.
But Israeli foreign ministry spokesman Yigal Palmor yesterday denied that diplomatic ties were under strain.
''I haven't heard any government accuse Israel of being involved in that, not in France, not in Britain, not in Ireland, not in Germany and now not in Australia,'' he told ABC Radio.
According to two Australian intelligence sources who have been in contact with The Age, the three dual citizens under ASIO surveillance all emigrated to Israel within the past decade.
Each of the men has since travelled back to Australia at different times to legally change their names and obtain new Australian passports.
One of the men under surveillance has changed his surname three times, while the other two men have changed their surnames twice. In each case, the men have changed their names from surnames that could be read as European-Jewish sounding names, to names more typically identified as Anglo-Australian.
Australian citizens are generally allowed to change their name once every 12 months, as long as it is not for criminal reasons.
The new Australian passports have since been used to gain entry to a number of countries that are hostile to Israel, including Iran, Syria and Lebanon. All three countries do not recognise Israel and specifically forbid Israeli citizens from entering.
The Age understands that the three Australian citizens share an involvement with a European communications company that has a subsidiary located in the Middle East.
The Age has contacted two of the men, both of whom denied they were involved in any kind of espionage activity. They did confirm that they had changed their surnames, but said the proposition that they had done so in order to obtain new travel documents to travel throughout the Middle East was, in the words of one of them, ''totally absurd''.
Both said they had changed their names for personal reasons. One of the men is also believed to hold British citizenship, and is believed to have come to the attention of British intelligence after he had changed his name.
ASIO had no comment.
An Israeli intelligence expert told The Age yesterday it was no secret that Israel approached people who had emigrated from other countries to help Israel by handing over their passports. ''The names are used later, but the person providing the passport is not involved.''
A former officer with Australia's spy agency, Australian Secret Intelligence Service, Warren Reed, said passport theft by foreign agencies was ''nothing new''.
''The use of false documents in the intelligence game is as old as the intelligence game,'' he said.
Loading
Liberal MP Julian McGauran split with his leader's stance and criticised Foreign Minister Stephen Smith for ''publicly pointing the finger at Israel''.
Opposition Leader Tony Abbott, who had initially criticised Australia's passport system, would not be drawn on the affair yesterday. With AAP
