Mar 17, 2016
How the GOP elite plan to rob Donald Trump
infowars.com/how-the-gop-elite-plan-to-rob-donald-trump

Shhhh. I’ve just come from a meeting of the Republican Establishment. You know, those guys who want to replace what the voters want with what they want. That Republican Establishment. I’m not supposed to tell you what was said, so don’t quote me. I’ve been to every Republican National Convention since 1964 and I’ve worked the floor in every convention since 1972 including for Ronald Reagan in 1976, the last time we had a contested GOP Convention. So let’s just say I know the ropes.
Despite his historic run in the primaries, Trump will never, repeat never, get the nomination if this bunch can stop him. Forget about them conceding Trump the victory once he gets to the magic 1237 (Fifty percent of the available delegates). They’ve cooked up a strategy to be employed at all costs to steal delegates from Trump so that he’ll fall below the 1237 on the first ballot, and then, before the second ballot to present one of their group (Mitt Romney, call your office) as the Savior of the Grand Old Party. While each state’s individual law governs, most delegates are not bound to the candidate that brought them once the first ballot is over. Stall Trump on the first ballot and the Bush-Romney-Rubio-Kasich-Ryan-McConnell combine can go really to work
Cleveland, ladies and gentlemen, won’t be for the faint of heart.
The insiders have poured over the rules of the Republican Party (well, heck, they WROTE those rules in the first place) and they have found a way to lie, cheat and steal Trump out of enough delegates to force a second ballot. Here is how they plan to do it: Rule 16 (d). This byzantine concoction of legalese, simply put, says that nobody can be a delegate if he is from a state where voters who are not registered Republicans can vote in the Republican primary. Like Massachusetts, where Trump got 22 delegates. Not like New Hampshire, where Democrats and Independents can officially re-register as Republicans going into the polling booth, vote on a Republican ballot, and re-register as a Dem on their way out, all on the same day. But like Arkansas, where Trump racked up 16 delegates.
Let me put it another way: in New Hampshire, Republican primary ballots are only given to registered Republicans, even if the voter registered as a Republican exactly 7 ½ seconds before getting the ballot and switched back to Democrat 12 seconds after he voted Republican. The point is the voter was an official Republican when he got the ballot and voted. Other states omit this nicety and just ask voters which ballot they want when they walk in, regardless of their registration. The GOP bigwigs plan on challenging Trump’s delegates from those states.
Missouri is an example of another opportunity for the establishment to practice chicanery. Missouri’s rules regarding delegate selection are clear and simple to follow: the winner in each of the state’s eight congressional districts gets 5 votes. The winner of the entire state then gets an extra 12 votes. Easy, peasey, right? WRONG. Missouri law doesn’t require county election authorities to report votes by congressional district, only by county. But ever since Baker v. Carr (the “one man, one vote” case) congressional districts don’t mirror county lines, because all 435 congressional districts have to have roughly the same number of people in them, and county lines don’t change as easily as congressional district lines. So, the Secretary of State of Missouri, Jason Kander – The youngest statewide elected official in America – a DEMOCRAT- will make the decision how many delegates to certify to each candidate, Trump, Cruz and Kasich. That sound you hear is of lawyers busily writing lawsuits to file if the county election officials refuse to report by congressional district, and we’ll see what happens in the next few days. But back to the convention steal.
The GOP Kingmakers may argue that Rule 38 – which prohibits states from requiring their delegations from voting as a unit, by a majority vote of all members of their state delegation—could,be interpreted to mean that delegates are not bound at all, even on the first ballot! (However tortured this reasoning is, all you have to remember is that the courts aren’t the ones to interpret these rules, they are going to have the meaning that a majority (there’s that pesky 1237 number) of delegates who survive any challenges to being seated, give to these rules. That brings us now to the mechanics of the steal, which is to say, contests to seating particular individual delegates.
Not later than 22 days before the July convention starts, there will be a meeting of the Standing Committee on Contests, whose membership is drawn from the Republican National Committee (“RNC”…the ultimate party “establishment”) to hear any “contest,” meaning “challenge” to the right of any specific person to be a delegate. These contests must be filed 30 or more days before the planned start of the convention. Then, the Standing Committee makes its recommendation to the full RNC which will have the final say, again, before the convention even begins. However, they don’t have the final say. On the first day of the convention, the Convention Committee on Credentials will meet to hear appeals of the RNC’s decisions. Since this Committee is comprised of ordinary delegates (not necessarily RNC elites) this is where the Big-Shot’s secret plan can come unraveled. That is if Donald’s operatives have these rules, and particularly rules 19-25, memorized by heart and are canny enough to know exactly how and when to use these rules to advantage.
But all is not is lost to The Donald’s cause – far from it. If he is close to the magic number on the first ballot he has the Vice Presidential nomination to barter with on the second. Widespread voter fraud in Texas and Oklahoma and the structure of the ballot in Ohio could sustain challenges before the entire convention to the seating of those delegations. After all, this is precisely how Dwight D. Eisenhower wrested the nomination from Bob Taft in 1952. But make no mistake: the Big Steal is ON.
