Aug 04, 2017
DWS: Imran Awan is the kindest, bravest, warmest, most wonderful human being I've ever known in my life
dailycaller.com/2017/08/04/dws-imran-awan-is-the-kindest-bravest-warmest-most-wonderful-human-being-ive-ever-known-in-my-life

If you haven’t been following the Case of Debbie Wasserman Schultz and the Pricey IT Guy, the Daily Caller’s own Luke Rosiak has been all over it. You can check out his archive of stories here. Basically, a very shady character named Imran Awan spent over a decade working IT for a number of Democrats, getting paid a lot of money for work that nobody can seem to account for. And he seems to have had access to a lot more information than he was supposed to have. Yet even after he was banned from the House network, DWS kept him on her payroll. He was arrested for bank fraud last week while trying to flee to Pakistan, and DWS has kept her yap shut about it.
Until now. Anthony Man, Broward County Sun-Sentinel:

  Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz defiantly stands by her decision to keep 
  an information technology aide on her payroll for six months after he was banned 
  from the House network and fired by other members of Congress.
  
  “I believe that I did the right thing, and I would do it again,” Wasserman Schultz 
  said Thursday in an exclusive interview with the Sun Sentinel. “There are times 
  when you can’t be afraid to stand alone, and you have to stand up for what’s right.
  
  “It would have been easier for me to just fire him,” she said.
  
Note: She fired him. After he was arrested while trying to skip the country.

What the hell does this guy have on her? It must be a doozy.

Of course, she knows her core audience. She knows what they want to believe:

  And, she said, she believes he may have been put under scrutiny because of his 
  religious faith. Awan is Muslim.
  
Yep, that must be it. He’d have gotten away with it too, if not for those blasted meddling Christians.

Nothing about this whole thing surprises me, because I just assume politicians are corrupt. And I also assume that if they’re Democrats, they’ll get away with it. But maybe I’ll be pleasantly surprised. Maybe Debbie Wasserman Schultz will be brought to account.

Hey, anything can happen!
