Mar 01, 2018
'You might even say they hacked our democracy'; Tucker blasts DOJ over congressional hack
dailycaller.com/2018/03/01/tucker-imran-awan

Fox News host Tucker Carlson questioned the federal government’s response to a Congressional hack that potentially exposed information to foreign actors, in a segment Wednesday.
Luke Rosiak, investigative reporter for The Daily Caller News Foundation, criticized the Department of Justice’s handling of the Imran Awan case on Fox News’ “Tucker Carlson Tonight.” Carlson questioned why Awan, the former IT aide of Democratic Florida Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz who allegedly hacked government servers, has not been charged.
“This is the pattern we’ve seen time and again,” Rosiak said, “where the [Department of Justice] and the FBI have evidence of crimes — particularly in cases involving Democrats and the politically connected — and there’s just no charges. And it’s stuff that everyone knows if the average joe were to do this stuff, they’d go straight to jail.”
The FBI and Department of Justice’s response to House Inspector General reports of Awan’s activities did not appear to take the allegations seriously, Rosiak said. House investigators spent six months investigating Imran Awan and others and found evidence they improperly accessed data while working for various members of the House.
Awan also allegedly stole servers from the House, funneled money into Pakistan, and slipped the country while under FBI surveillance. Agents also apprehended Awan’s wife, Hina Alvi, at an airport in 2017, but allowed her to leave, TheDCNF reported Wednesday.
“What does the FBI do? They put literally a first-year agent on the case. we are talking this is the same pattern of the [Democratic National Committee] hack. We have got potential foreign meddling, but we have a cyber breach. They put a junior guy on the case.”
“If you have seen that IG report, you cannot conclude anything other than that these guys infiltrated congress and made unauthorized access to data,” Rosiak said.
“You might almost say they hacked our democracy,” Carlson said at the end of the interview, apparently referencing Russia’s activities to influence the 2016 presidential election.
