Jul 18, 2018
Trump 'disappointed' DOJ didn't look at Imran Awan evidence
dailycaller.com/2018/07/18/trump-awan-doj-evidence

President Donald Trump brought up former congressional systems administrator Imran Awan for the second time in a week.
He told Tucker Carlson Tuesday night:

  Am I disappointed that they’re not looking at all of the crooked things 
  taking place on the other side?
  
  Like the Pakistani man who left with these three servers, knew everything 
  about Shultz, knew everything, Debbie Wasserman Schultz, and I think he 
  even had three servers, I believe they even have them, and they don’t want 
  to use them.
  
Imran had access to the Democratic Caucus’ server, but there’s no evidence he “had three servers.”
In Helsinki, Trump said:

  What happened to the servers of the Pakistani gentleman that worked on 
  the DNC? Where are those servers? They’re missing? Where are they?
  
In July 2016, the House Office of Inspector General found that Imran — then-Democratic National Committee Chair Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz’ longtime IT aide — made “unauthorized access” to congressional servers, including those of computers connected to the House Democratic Caucus.
The report found suspicious “access to Democratic Caucus server.”
“Collectively, the shared administrators accessed the [main Caucus] server 995 times, or 8.2 times per day,” the report said. It also shows that computers in the “Democratic Caucus Conference Room” and “Conference RoomL1640” were “logged onto frequently.”
The House’s cybersecurity findings came only days after WikiLeats began publishing the DNC emails, but no action was taken for months, and no one mentioned the findings publicly.
Then, a Feb. 3, 2017 memo by the House Sergeant At Arms, the chamber’s top law enforcement official, said the main House Democratic Caucus server went “missing” soon after it was identified as evidence. Other outlets that have written about Trump’s remarks have not reported this letter.
Imran was banned from House computer network the day that memo was sent. But Wasserman Schultz refused to fire him, and a laptop with the username RepDWS was found in a phone booth in April 2017, according to a Capitol Police report. The police seized it as evidence.
Whatever was on the laptop, the Florida Democrat didn’t want it looked it. She threatened the Capitol Police chief with “consequences” if he did not return the evidence.
A note was left in the phone booth saying “attorney-client privilege,” and Imran’s attorney argued that he felt “very strongly” that prosecutors should not be able to look at the laptop.
Imran was arrested at Dulles Airport with two cell phones, a laptop, and $9,000 in cash in July 2017. A year later, the Department of Justice said it found no evidence he broke laws on Capitol Hill, but did not explain the discrepancies with the earlier findings.
Other equipment may have disappeared, too. House offices that employed Imran altered invoices for computer equipment in ways that made it easier to avoid reporting requirements, according to the IG report.
Wendy Anderson, the chief of staff for New York Democrat Rep. Yvette Clarke, told House investigators she believed that Imran’s brother Abid was stealing from the office, The Daily Caller News Foundation previously reported. Clarke had “written off” one-tenth of her taxpayer-funded office budget after nearly $120,000 in computer equipment could not be located.
Four women accused Imran of misconduct in police reports or lawsuits, including:

  • His wife Hina Alvi, who also worked for Wasserman Schultz, and who said in a Pakistani lawsuit that Imran was a fraudster who controlled her with threats of physical harm to her loved ones;
  • His stepmother, Samina Gilani, who said in a Virginia lawsuit that Imran wiretapped her, extorted her and held her “in captivity;”
  • A second wife he was simultaneously married to, Summaira Siddique, who told Virginia police he was keeping her “like a slave” and was found bloodied; and
  • Salam Chaudry, who said she wanted to go to a shelter to get away from Imran.
  
Wasserman Schultz previously declined to express concern about these filings.
