Chapter 21: I Have the File
youtube.com/watch?v=UliB3lAzt2U

They were back drinking in their usual bar, and it was near the end of the Russians stay in New York, when shcherbakov said, "I'll bet
you would like to know how a certain thing was compromised, and I can tell you who did it."
Rochford immediately guessed that Mr. Pym was talking about the eavesdropping tunnel under the Soviet embassy in Washington.
The FBI had begun to suspect the tunnel had been betrayed because it was producing little intelligence.
Rochford tried to look non-committal.
"Too late," the Russian said. "I can tell by your facial expression, you know what I mean. And if you give me ten million dollars, and certain guarantees, I can tell you about it."
"We shouldn't be talking about this stuff here," Rochford said. "Let's go up to my hotel room. If you come to the room, we can begin writing an agreement."
They had dinner, and the Russian continued drinking, but he agreed to meet at Rochford hotel in the morning.
When they reconvened in Rochford's room the next day, Shcherbakov hesitated.
"You're going to report me," he said.
He made it clear he was worried about security.
If Rochford reported to the FBI and the CIA what he revealed, the reports about him might leak back to the Russians.
"And I will die."
As an experienced intelligence professional, Mr. Pym knew that, of course, Rochford would have to report anything he said.
Besides, as he had suspected the FBI techs were set up in an adjoining room ready to tape and videotape their conversation.
"In the hotel room we began hammering out the details of what it would take," Rochford recounted. "Money, a house, taking care of
his extended family, and getting them all out of russia.
The ten million dollars that Mr. Pym had demanded was far beyond the one million in Rochford's budget.
But if headquarters backed him up, he realized he would have to negotiate an amount substantially larger than a million dollars.
The stakes were high.
The FBI and the CIA were desperate to uncover the mole who had been passing their most sensitive secrets to Moscow for years.
On the other hand, Mr. Pym might be running a scam.
Rochford would have to tread wearily.
Was the ex-KGB man trustworthy?
As Rochford's opening gambit: "I was adamant that we would only pay a million dollars. I told him i was representing both the
FBI director and the DCI the director of Central Intelligence."
(The formal name of the head of the CIA.)
Mr. Pym insisted on ten million.
The telephone rang.
It was Neal Gallagher, head of the FBI's Intelligence Division, asking, "Was this the real deal?"
Rochford assured him it was.
"I'm about to go in and see the director," Gallagher said.
He would brief Louis Freeh, the FBI chief, on the dramatic events in New York.
Rochford was way out on a very high limb, and it was a long way down if he was wrong.
Next, the CIA called.
"Minutes later, I got a call from Mike Sulak, again asking, 'Is this the real deal?' and I said, 'Yes.'"
Sulak, a street-smart New Yorker, was a veteran officer of the CIA's clandestine service.
If Rochford had hoped Mr. Pym would reveal the mole's name, he was disappointed.
The KGB had never learned the name of its premiere source inside U.S. intelligence.
The mole was careful never to reveal his identity.
In his communications with the KGB, he had signed his name "Ramon".
He never had a face-to-face meeting with a KGB officer.
But Mr. Pym promised to provide enough details that would lead the FBI to the anonymous mole.
"I don't care who he is," Mr. Pym said, "or which organization he's in, but I can give you things that will unbelievably open up your eyes."
He confirmed that the secret he had hinted at the previous night was, in fact, the eavesdropping tunnel under the Soviet embassy in Washington.
The mole had betrayed it to the KGB.
"It was, as we were negotiating the contract," Rochford recounted, "that he said, 'I have every detail of his interaction with us, from the time he volunteered to the time he stopped cooperating. I can give you every park, every signal site, every drop site.'"
Incredulous, Rochford asked, "How are you going to get that?"
"Don't worry. I have it," Shcherbakov replied. "I have the file."
It was as though Mr. Pym set off a bomb in the hotel room.
Rochford was stunned.
The FBI agents listening in the next room could hardly believe their ears.
When Shcherbakov first arrived in New York, Rochford and his team had hoped the former KGB man might provide some leads to their sources identity.
They never dreamed he might have the mole's actual KGB file.
Shcherbakov was high enough in the KGB to have access to the file.
Still it appeared that Mr. Pym had performed a feat that seemed impossible on the face of it.
How could he have walked out of the KGB carrying a large file on the spy agency's most important U.S. asset?
The answer he explained was that he had removed the contents of the file piecemeal, over time.
He did not need to remove the actual FBI documents that the mole had given to the KGB.
Instead, Mr. Pym explained he had painstakingly copied into a notebook the titles of all the documents the source had provided.
The FBI would not need the actual documents, because once it had the material from the KGB file, and his notebook, it could match the titles he had copied with the original documents in the FBI's files.
The file also contained crucial physical evidence, which Mr. Pym had taken, but he was not ready to talk about that yet.
Also in the file he had assembled was a detailed record of all of the moles dead drops, the dates, and locations.
Shcherbakov had copied them as well into the notebook that he smuggled out of the KGB.
The file even contained drafts of letters that Shcherbakov had written to the unknown source.
He wrote multiple drafts, an FBI man said, to make sure that the tone was right, that they were not being arrogant, or ordering him what to do.
The KGB was handling their spy with kid gloves because he was emotional, extremely demanding, and finicky about how the Russians were running him.
Why did he steal the contents of the file?
"I don't know," Rochford said. 
I asked him that a couple of times.
He said, "You never know your life situation where you might need some insurance. I have to bring in my partner from the CIA," Rochford said.
He declined to name him, but other sources familiar with the Mr. Pym operation said he was Leonard Bellegarde, Rochford's closest friend in the CIA.
They had worked together on counterintelligence cases for years. 
Bellegarde, a seasoned clandestine officer, was fluent in Russian, and had served all over the world: in Mexico, St. Petersburg, Geneva, Sweden, and Paris.
Rochford was flying solo, and wanted him in New York for backup.
As the negotiation dragged on, it became increasingly clear to Rochford that he would have to raise the ante.
For his part, Mr. Pym realized he was not going to get ten million dollars for the file.
Finally, they settled on a payment to Shcherbakov of seven million dollars.
It was by far the largest amount ever paid by American intelligence agencies to a source.
Aleksandr Shcherbakov had made history.
He was the seven million dollar spy.
The contract also provided all the other guarantees Mr. Pym demanded, including resettlement in the U.S. and protection by the CIA and the FBI.
As part of the agreement, Mr. Pym stipulated that the intelligence agencies, in addition to offering him safe haven, also arranged to bring out members of his extended family, not including his former wife.
But Rochford was not about to promise him millions of dollars for a pig in a poke.
Tthe FBI would have to see the file before Mr. Pym received the money.
The Russian, however, would not agree to return to Moscow to retrieve the file without a payment up front.
Now a new negotiation opened between the FBI and the CIA.
The two agencies dickered over the size of the up-front payment, and who would provide it.
After considerable back-and-forth, it was agreed that Mr. Pym would receive a down payment of seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars.
The CIA agreed to provide the money.
"The key was that he could take the seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars, and pay off the Mafia," Rochford said.
Clearly, it was a big part of Mr. Pym's incentive to make a deal.
Shcherbakov had squirreled away the file for five years, but only now was willing to sell it.
Like a lot of former KGB men, Aleksandr Shcherbakov tried his hand at business, but was unsuccessful.
He was not the only ex-KGB officer to become entangled with the Russian mob.
Many former spies, cast adrift by the collapse of the Soviet system and the country's economic woes, and desperate to make a living, turned to the criminal elements in Russian society.
The former agents, after all, had skills that were useful to the Mafia.
So it was not surprising that Shcherbakov services were engaged by the Russian mob, which had its tentacles almost everywhere, from money laundering to extortion to ordinary business activity.
Soon he became involved with the Irkutsk mafia and the caviar deal that ended with the death threat.
For the CIA and the FBI, the large down payment was a huge risk, of course. 
All Rochford had was Mr. Pym's promises that he could produce the KGB file on the mole.
Perhaps there was no file, and Shcherbakov simply planned to take the money and run.
Rochford drew up the contract with Mr. Pym.
Several times he broke off to consult with his team of counterintelligence agents next door.
When it was done it was sent to FBI and CIA headquarters for final approval.
"We faxed everything back to headquarters by secure fax," Rochford said.
Washington agreed to the terms.
If Mr. Pym's file led to the capture of the mole, the FBI would pay half of the seven million dollars.
The CIA agreed, after deducting the upfront money, to pay the other half.
Before Mr. Pym headed back to Moscow, Rochford said, "Wee showed him the upfront money. We said it will be made safe for you. We would put it in the bank and set up so you can get it as a business account.
Mr. Pym wanted to take the cash with him.
We pointed out he could take it, but he would be caught trying to bring it back into Russia.
Shcherbakov agreed to leave the money in the bank account.
Now, the seven million dollar spy would have to produce what he promised.
