Chapter 18: I'll Have a Lobster 
youtube.com/watch?v=A5mGxBTQQYQ

Aleksandr Shcherbakov left the hotel and strolled down the Avenue, enjoying the early summer weather in New York, and feeling
pretty good about himself.
The meeting could not have gone better.
He had finally established himself in the export business, and from what was said at the meeting, he had every reason to expect customers in New York, the very center of US commerce.
He had not walked very far, however, when he was approached by a stranger.
"Who are you?" Shcherbakov asked.
In reply, the stranger pulled out his business card.
It identified him as Mike Rochford, Federal Bureau of Investigation.
"I said, 'How are you?'" Rochford recounted. "'I knew you many years ago.' It was a lie. I never met him before in my life," Rochford said.
But counter-spies are not clergymen.
For many years, a framed quotation from Eric Ambler decorated the office wall of James Gear, the director of the FBI's Intelligence Division.
It read, in part, "I think if I were asked to single out one specific group of men one category as being the most suspicious, inhuman, sadistic, double-crossing set of bastards in any language, I would say, without hesitation, the people who run counterespionage departments."
Shcherbakov was deflated, but Rochford pressed on.
"Let's go have a drink," he said.
"I don't drink with strangers," the Russian replied.
"Okay," Rochford said. "You have a glass of water, I'll have a beer.
They walked back to Shcherbakov's hotel.
In the lobby, Shcherbakov demanded, "How do I know you are who you say you are?"
In reply, Rochford pulled out his official credential.
Shcherbakov got angry.
It was finally beginning to dawn on him that he'd been lured to New York and ensnared in a counterintelligence operation.
"You ruined my business opportunity," he protested.
"You set me up. I'm going to the security officer of the Russian Mission to the U.N., and you're going to wake up tomorrow and you will be on the front page of the New York Times."
"Don't flatter yourself," Rochford retorted. "You'll be lucky to get in a comic strip in The Washington Times."
Shcherbakov was furious.
"He's swearing at me in Russian," Rochford said, "and doesn't know I speak Russian.
Rochford tried to calm the Russian down.
"I said, 'I just want to help the US, and the result will make you the richest businessman in Russia.'"
That seemed to get the Russians attention.
"I have to be here for another couple of weeks," Rochford said.
He knew that his target wasn't going anywhere: the plane ticket that was sent to Shcherbakov had a return date two weeks later.
It was 11:30 a.m. 
The Russian didn't drink anything.
Rochford was finishing a beer.
"Only two people know I'm here," Rochford assured him. "Only the director of the CIA, and the director of the FBI."
"Bullshit," Shcherbakov said. "You probably have a whole team of people here."
He was right.
A large contingent of top counter-spies, as well as technical specialists, had accompanied Rochford to New York.
They included Carolyn Gwen-Fuller Deborah Evan-Smith, Jim Milburn, the Soviet analysts Dan Cloyd and Les Weiser, who found the post-it note that ended Aldrich Ames' spying career.
"You're probably recording everything," Shcherbakov said.
"I said, 'I'm not recording anything.'"
That was true, for the moment.
Rochford had booked a hotel not far from the Benjamin as his headquarters.
The FBI techs were set up in the room next to his, and ready to secretly record everything, if at some point Shcherbakov could be persuaded to meet in Rochefort's room.
Rochford asked the Russian if he had any money.
He said he didn't.
"I'll take you to dinner tonight," Rochford said.
"Will it be paid for by your director?" Shcherbakov asked.
Rochford said, "Yes."
"Good," Shcherbakov said. "I'll have a lobster."
