Chapter 16: Moscow Contact
youtube.com/watch?v=gvGxF9zWYa0

In ten years, Operation Pennywise had failed to find any KGB spies willing to take the FBI's money.
The Bureau's counterspies decided to try to narrow the field of KGB officers who might, for a million dollars, be able to identify the mole in U.S. intelligence.
Russian sources were asked who among their KGB colleagues might know some wisp of information, some fragment of quarter gossip that might lead to the identity of the second mole.
Alexander Zaporozhsky, the CIA's "Max", who had earlier provided key information that pointed to Alderich Ames, had some helpful suggestions, but no solid leads to offer this time.
Evgeny Toropov, a KGB agent in Ottawa, who later defected in Canada, provided some clues that interested the FBI's counterintelligence officials.
Toropov, listed as first secretary of the russian embassy
vanished from the soviet embassy in
january 2001 in Moscow on February 17th
ATAR toss the Russian news agency
carried a brief news story reporting
that tore apart and was believed to be
in the United States a Canadian Foreign
Ministry official said Canadian
authorities have no information about
the whereabouts of Toropov since
Toropov had provided his information
to the FBI at least two years before the
press report it was clear that he had
been passing information to u.s.
intelligence for some time but Toropov
for various reasons added a touch
of mystery to the search for the mole
FBI counterintelligence officials were
particularly tight-lipped about his role
he did not identify Moscow's long-term
mole inside
US intelligence but Toropov was
helpful according to one high-ranking
FBI counter spy whatever information
Toropov was able to provide was not
without risk
the KGB does not as a rule
forgive defectors who in some cases have
become targets with lethal results when
the FBI in 2010 arrested ten Russian
illegals who were traded back to Moscow
in a spy swap an official in the
government of Vladimir Putin hinted that
the traitor who had betrayed the ten
illegals might be liquidated
he made a not very veiled reference to
the assassination in Mexico in 1940 of
Leon Trotsky Stalin's arch foe by the
Spanish communists Ramon Mercado a
Russian intelligence agent who buried in
ice axe in trotsky's skull the life of
the person who betrayed the illegals was
in peril the unidentified Russian
official warned
we know who he is and where he is
he said don't doubt that a Merck Adair
has already been sent after him
the fate of such a person is unenviable
living every day in fear of retribution
then a Russian online newspaper
Leningrad skaia Pravda published a list
of five Russian intelligence defectors
who died under mysterious circumstances
one was gif guinea torapart who was said
in a published account to have
accidentally electrocuted himself in his
bath in April 2012 by now Mike Rochford
had approached KGB spies 27 times with
the offer of a million dollars to no avail
he was running out of current and former
KGB officers to pitch in his ongoing
effort to find the mole for help he
decided to turn to his former CIA colleague
big Jack Platt as a known FBI
counterintelligence operative Rochford
could not travel to Moscow he knew too
many secrets to take the risk and US
intelligence officers were kept under
tight surveillance in Moscow any current
KGB officers there were out of his reach
as were the dozens of retired KGB
officers who still lived in or near the
Russian capital but Platt because of his
business relationship with Gennady
vasilenko could travel to Russia with no
difficulty Platt had been retired from
the CIA for more than a decade but he
often met with ex KGB officers on his
trips to Russia however unlikely perhaps
one would whisper or hint something that
might be helpful to Rochford
On his visits to Moscow, Platt emphasized, he was
acting on his own he was not acting for
the CIA and was not on
contract to the Intelligence Agency he
said he cut all ties with the CIA after
he retired in the years that followed he
grew friendly with the FBI he said but
he was not acting for or on contract to
the FBI either
When he was in Moscow to meet with vasilenko 
A free spirit, Platt did not want to be encumbered by any formal ties to the intelligence agencies.
On a trip to Moscow in 1999, Platt visited the offices of Securitar, a private investigative agency headed by an ex-KGB agent.
He met there with his partner, Vasilenko, who had worked at the securitar company for several years in the 1990s.
One of the employees was another former KGB officer, whose position at the firm was precarious.
He was having a hard time, a colleague recalled.
His wife divorced him, he lost his job at a bank, and Securitar took him in, and gave him a desk and a phone.
But he was
nothing but trouble running up a big
phone bill but not producing any clients
they wanted to get rid of him 
His name was Alexandr V. Shcherbakov.
Now nearing 50, and with his future uncertain, he approached vasilenko and asked if he would introduce him to Platt.
Vasilenko did, but did not stay for their meeting.
"You are a businessman, Shcherbakov said to Platt.
"Can you introduce me to some people? I am in the business of selling artifacts."
He pleaded with Platt to put him in touch with contacts in the business world in the US.
His hope, he said, was to export works of art, such as the small hand-painted lacquered boxes from Pollock, for which Russia is famous.
Or paintings, or icons.
Platt cut him off.
"Absolutely not," he said.
"I will not have anything to do with smuggling icons out of Russia."
It was illegal, he pointed out.
Shcherbakov continued to importune Platt to help him.
At the time, Russians could not easily leave to travel abroad without a reason.
Perhaps, Shcherbakov persisted, Platt could arrange for one of his business contacts to send him an invitation to come to New York. 
That would provide the pretext he needed to travel overseas.
Platt made no commitment to the Russian.
All he said at the end of their meeting was, let me look into it.
