Chapter 29: America 101
youtube.com/watch?v=YZvMxzBcfkU

After Aleksandr Shcherbakov, aka "Mr. Pym", had been fully debriefed by the intelligence agencies, his security and his future life became the responsibility of a highly secret and little-known CIA branch: the National Resettlement Operations Center.
NROC was located in an unmarked CIA building, out route 7 in Northern Virginia, near Tyson's Corner, a large retail shopping center. Defectors were not taken to NROC, but the program was run from that secret location.
Among the intelligence agencies, resettlement is the term used to arrange for a new life.
And a new identity for defectors such as Mr. Pym, according to an intelligence official well-versed in the operations of the resettlement program, "it serves defectors who have provided intelligence of such significant interest that we bring them here if they want it."
Over the years, thousands of defectors from some 30 countries have started new lives in the I/S/ through the program.
Mr. Pym, of course, was a special case.
No defector before him had ever been paid anything like seven million dollars.
And, unlike many others who changed sides in the espionage wars, he would not expect to receive additional money.
"He was very satisfied with the financial arrangement," Neil Gallagher said. 
And a lot of security related issues were taken care of.
"We had covered his financial security and his personal security, and assisted him in the transition," the intelligence official close to the program said.
The CIA officers who deal directly with the defectors are known as RCO's, or resettlement case officers.
"They are well aware," he said, "that it's tough very stressful to change sides. Defectors, after all, have made the wrenching decision to leave behind their their previous lives, sometimes their spouses and other close relatives, their friends, colleagues, and their country's culture, and entire way of life."
The CIA runs the resettlement program, and provides varying levels of financial support to most defectors, because many are important sources of intelligence some, like Mr. Pym, provide crucial clues to the identity of moles burrowed inside the U.S.
If not for the tape and the fingerprints he provided to the FBI, Robert Hanssen might never have been caught.
Vitaly Yurchenko, the KGB officer, who defected in 1985, provided leads before he had defected that identified Ronald Pelton, the former NSA employee, and Edward Lee Howard, the turncoat CIA officer.
How much money the CIA pays a defector, and for how long, ferries from case to case.
"A KGB officer who was of great value and worked as agent in place and is 50, chances are he would get lifelong support," the official said. An 'agent in place' is an intelligence term meaning, for example, a KGB officer who agrees to take the high risk of remaining in his post for a period of time, and continuing to feed information to the CIA before eventually defecting and coming to the U.S. For most defectors, however we give them a helping hand, not a lifelong handout. Some cases do get lifelong support, but there are reasons. If a guy is 58 and never going to work again, for example, years ago we threw a lot of money at them for a short period of time, but we learned that we give a lot of money, they piss it away. Still a high value defector might get a package of
fifty thousand a year for five years or
even longer but people who agreed to
delay defecting and who agreed to remain
for a time as an agent in place are
usually told that money will be held in
escrow
them in a savings account in cases where
money is held in escrow it might build
up to a million or more we deal with
health care and education it varies with
the defector every package is different
all of them sign is secrecy agreement we
don't want them talking about sources
and methods each one signs an MOA a
memorandum of agreement under the
agreement defectors promise not to
divulge details of the resettlement
program we have a team of people who
teach America 101 how to go through a
drive-through at McDonald's how to
establish credit how to talk to a bank
in some cases we teach them how to drive
and how to deal with speeding tickets
the CIA does not fix tickets this is how
you use a microwave please don't put the
cat in it one our CEO had to show them
how to use the washing machine the wife
of a defector was carrying buckets of
water from the swimming pool into the
washing machine we had to explain to her
you just turn a knob some retired Chiefs
of Station teach the course we teach it
in safe houses around Washington they
learn how to use an ATM machine make a
phone call and use the Internet all our
defectors get computers and we make
money available for computer training
will take them to a car dealer and teach
them how to buy a car and how to bargain
they're pleased as punch when they knock
eight hundred dollars off a car price of
course mr. PIM did not need everything
that was taught in America 101 since he
had lived in Washington for four years
from 1981 to 1985 when he was assigned
to the Soviet embassy as a young KGB
officer under diplomatic cover still
things change in 15 years so he likely
needed to brush up on some aspects of
life in the US as a multi-millionaire
Mr. Pim may not have seen the need to
work but the spigot of CIA money ran out
after a time for younger
factors they were encouraged to find
jobs the toughest thing is to get them
employed the official said we have
employment specialists psychiatrists to
motivate defectors educational
specialists and English teachers we
talked to them about the kind of work
they would like to do we help guide them
into careers we have practiced job
interviews we give them video training
we take them to job fairs we teach them
how to dress and write Seavey's crafting
a resume of course is one of the more
complicated problems faced by defectors
looking for work for example a Russian
defector can hardly put down KGB agent
in his listing of previous positions
held even if he claims he was
self-employed there might be awkward
gaps in his resume CIA sources say the
agency generally tries to avoid
inventing companies to pad a defectors
resume back stopping the false
employment records is time-consuming and
expensive of course no other defector
but mr. PIM received anything close to
the 7 million dollars it took to
persuade him to produce the secret KGB
file and not all defectors are happy
with how they are treated in 1986
Victor Geun de rêve a KGB colonel
escaped from Athens with the help of the
CIA
three years later he telephoned me at my
office in Washington DC with a litany of
complaints about his treatment he said
he was even thinking about Reed
affecting to some other country I wrote
an op-ed piece in The New York Times
about his situation and then a longer
article for the newspapers Sunday
magazine in the wake of the unfavorable
publicity and investigations of the
defector program by both the Senate and
House intelligence committees the CIA
promised to institute reforms an ROC was
given new leadership a larger staff and
an external review board was created to
hear grievances
by then a series of disturbing cases had
surfaced these indicated that not all
defectors had received meaningful
financial support or the kind of career
assistance that leads to a good job
Andre Sorokin a Soviet graduate student
fluent in three languages defected in
Japan he was debriefed for four months
by the CIA in Munich then abandoned in
Manhattan penniless he found a room in
Spanish Harlem and considered himself
lucky to get a job as a dishwasher at an
oriental noodle restaurant on East 45th
Street Anatoly Bugatti the acting KGB
rezident in Morocco lost almost a
million dollars that he had been paid by
the CIA after he entrusted his money to
an investment adviser he said had been
recommended by the agency Bugatti lost
his money
the CIA countered because he made bad
investments on his own yogini Novikov a
former top arab specialist in moscow
ended up working as a bellhop at a motel
in alexandria virginia after the CIA had
finished debriefing him Alexandra Costa
the wife of a Soviet diplomat in
Washington had been a professor in
Moscow with university degrees in
sociology and Scandinavian languages she
was urged by the CIA to go to
secretarial school when she defected in
1978 Vladimir and Sakharov a former
Soviet diplomat in the Middle East
risked his life to work as an agent in
place for the CIA
before he defected he was devastated
when the intelligence agency sent him to
a motel management school in Hollywood
there were similar tales before Victor
Gunda revs complaints and the
congressional scrutiny led the
intelligence agency to try to improve
its defector program although the CIA
resettlement program is somewhat akin to
the Justice Department's witness
protection program defectors
usually do not merit guards but most do
change their names making it difficult
for anyone wishing them harm to find
them we give a lot of them an 800 number
the official said if something's not
right they are told to call us right
away some have local CIA contacts
Unlike most defectors, Aleksandr Shcherbakov, Mr. Pym was guarded by the CIA after he defected in 2000. 
That precaution was necessary. 
The KGB was furious at him, since the file he purloined led directly to the capture of Robert Hansen, Moscow's longest-running source inside U.S. intelligence.
But Mr. Pym has a new name and identity.
He is safe from both the KGB and the Irkutsk mafia.
The CIA understandably would not talk at all about his whereabouts and his new life in America, but officials confirmed that he lives somewhere in the United States, and is well protected and rich.
