Chapter 25: The Voice of the Mole
youtube.com/watch?v=3f-_dgqSppM

On November 4th, after two failed efforts in Moscow, the third attempt to obtain the file was successful.
As Mr. Pim had promised, he showed up at the designated rendezvous, and handed over the file.
The precious file arrived in Washington in several carefully-wrapped packages, enough to fill a medium-sized suitcase.
It was guarded every step of the way from on its secret journey from Moscow to the FBI.
Mr. Pim had insisted that one package be marked DO NOT OPEN, and that it be held until he himself was safely out of Moscow.
The FBI did not know why Shcherbakov had mysteriously marked the package this way.
Although the counterintelligence agents were itching to see what was inside, it was decided to abide by his instructions.
The mystery package was not opened.
In less than two weeks, they knew, the Russian would come out of Moscow and explain the contents.
The file contained the all-important notebook in which Shcherbakov had copied all of the mole's dealing with the KGB, and later the SVR, over a period of ten years.
While the agents waited for Mr. Pym to arrive, there was work to be done.
At the FBI laboratory on the third floor of FBI headquarters, the techs began a detailed forensic examination of the file.
The contents were carefully dusted for fingerprints, but there were no useful prints.
In addition, every document, message, letter, and envelope was photographed.
There were translations needed, because much of the material was in Russian.
Shcherbakov had managed to compile an inventory and description in Russian of every document -- 6,000 pages in all -- that had been passed to Moscow by the mole.
The list would have to be translated back into English.
The file included the communications exchanged by the mole and the Russians over the course of ten years, and the titles of the documents he had given to the KGB.
But the detailed notes taken by Shcherbakov described them in sufficient detail, so that the FBI could retrieve them from its own files, as well as in some cases, from the files of the NSA and the CIA.
The counterintelligence agents then began the painstaking job of matching the titles of the documents in Shcherbakov's notebook with the originals in the FBI files.
A preliminary look at the files offered some tantalizing clues to the identity of the mole, but nothing conclusive.
More was needed.
Next, FBI analysts began a thorough examination of the file, searching for clues that would confirm the identity of the mole at last.
The letters and contents nowhere identified the mole by name or by organization.
He was referred to as "Ramon", or "B", or "Ramon Garcia".
Nevertheless, the counterintelligence agents believed that Gray Deceiver, the CIA officer Brian Kelley, would soon be arrested.
Ten days after handing the file to the CIA, the seven million dollar spy made it back to the U.S. for the last time.
On November 14th, Mr. Pym was in Washington, meeting with Rochford and other FBI counterintelligence agents.
As instructed, the FBI had not opened the envelope marked DO NOT OPEN.
"Now," Shcherbakov said. "Open it. There's a fingerprint of your guy on a bag, and a voice recording."
It was 14 years earlier, in 1986, that the unidentified mole had given the KGB the number of a pay phone in Northern Virginia that he arranged to call at an agreed time. 
On August 18th, unknown to the mole, the KGB agent who answered recorded part of their conversation.
Now, the FBI had the tape.
The Russians had kept everything, even one of the plastic trash bags that the mole had used to wrap the documents that he left for the KGB in dead drops around Washington.
Mr. Pym explained how he came to possess the bag inside the mystery package.
In addition to the tape recording, was an ordinary black plastic trash bag, of the kind that suburban homeowners used to dispose of leaves or garbage.
When Hanson filled a dead drop, he would wrap the documents and disks in a plastic trash bag and tape it up to waterproof it, and protect it from the elements.
Then he would wrap the whole package in a second plastic bag.
Under normal procedure, Mr. Pym said someone else opened the bags.
He would then receive a pile of documents that had been handled first by others.
Only once did they drop off the outer bag with the documents.
He said when he removed the outer bag, he assumed that the only person who had touched the inner bag was himself and Ramon.
So he carefully put the inner bag in an envelope.
The plastic bag was to prove one of the two crucial items in the file that Shcherbakov removed from the KGB's first chief Directorate, it's foreign espionage arm.
The other was the tape recording.
The bag was sent to the FBI lab to check for fingerprints, but the bag would have to be handled with extreme care, and processing it for prints was going to take a while.
In the meantime, Rochford, with two colleagues Michael Waguespack and Tim Bereznay, turned to a room in the basement of the FBI to listen to the tape.
Waguespack, known as Wagues, grew up in the Cajun country near New Orleans, and was regarded as one of the best counterintelligence agents in the FBI.
Bereznay a was also an experienced counterintelligence agent, and a section chief at FBI headquarters.
Now, at last, Rochefort was sure the fate of Gray Deceiver, Brian Kelley, was sealed.
The FBI counterintelligence agents were still convinced that the CIA officer was the mole.
As the FBI agents settled back to listen, they were sure they were about to hear the voice of Brian Kelley.
The tape rolled, and the FBI agents could hardly wait to hear it.
The long mole hunt was about to be over.
To their utter consternation, the voice that boomed out from the speakers was not that of Brian Kelley.
The agents were stunned and chagrined at the unexpected turn of events.
Three years lost.
All that effort, and now, just as Rochford was sure that the mole was within his grasp, the shocking revelation: on a 14-year old snippet of magnetic tape that the bureau had been chasing the wrong man.
Brian Kelley was innocent.
His career at the CIA had suffered great damage that could not be undone and repaired.
But if the voice on the tape was not Brian Kelley, then who was it?
Waguespack recalled his frustration.
"I kept listening, and I said, 'I know that voice. The inflection. I know that voice, but I can't put it with anybody. That voice sounds familiar. We broke off that day, still unsure."
