Jun 22, 2017

The Honorable Loretta E. Lynch
Dear Ms. Lynch,

On April 22, 2017, The New York Times reported that during the investigation of Russian hacking against political organizations in the United States, the FBI "received a batch of hacked documents" from U.S. intelligence agencies that had access to stolen materials stored on Russian networks. One of the documents provided to the FBI reportedly appeared to have implications on the then-ongoing Clinton email investigation. Specifically, the FBI is reported to have obtained an email or memo "written by a Democratic operative who expressed confidence that Ms. Lynch would keep the Clinton investigation from going too far." According to anonymous government officials cited in the report, the discovery of the document "complicated" how FBI and the Justice Department would interact in the investigation because "[i]f Ms. Lynch announced that the case was closed, and Russia leaked the document, Mr. Comey believed it would raise doubts about the independence of the investigation." Similar concerns were raised by Director Corney during this Committee's May 3, 2017 oversight hearing:

  The normal way to do it would be have the Department of Justice
  announce it, and I struggled, as we got closer to the end of it, with
  -- a number things had gone on, some of which I cannot talk about yet, 
  that made me worry that the Department leadership could not credibly 
  complete the investigation and decline prosecution without grievous 
  damage to the American people's confidence in the justice system. 
  
  And then the capper was -- and I am not picking on the Attorney
  General, Loretta Lynch, who I like very much. But her meeting with
  President Clinton on that airplane was the capper for me. And I then 
  said, you know what? The Department cannot by itself credibly end this.
  
On May 24, 2017, The Washington Post reported that in early March 2016 the FBI had received "what was described as a Russian intelligence document" that "cited a supposed email describing how then-Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch had privately assured someone in the Clinton campaign that the email investigation would not push too deeply into the matter." More specifically, the Russian intelligence document reportedly "referred to an email supposedly written by the then-chair of the Democratic National Committee, Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, and sent to Leonard Benardo, an official with the Open Society Foundations." According to the article: "[i]n the supposed email, Wasserman Schultz claimed Lynch had been in private communication with a senior Clinton campaign staffer named Amanda Renteria during the campaign. The document indicated Lynch had told Renteria that she would not let the FBI investigation into Clinton go too far...

In order for the Committee to assess the situation, please respond to the following questions and provide the relevant documents by July 6, 2017:

  1. Did anyone from the FBI ever discuss or otherwise mention to you emails, 
     memos, or reports such as those described in these media reports?
  
  2. Are you aware of the existence of any email, memo, or report such as 
      those described in the cited media reports? If so, when and how did you 
      become aware of the document's existence? Did you have any reason to 
      doubt the authenticity of this document?
      
  3. To the best of your knowledge, have you ever communicated with Amanda 
      Renteria? If so, when and did you discuss the Clinton investigation? If so, 
      please describe the communications and provide all records relating to them.
  
  4. To the best of your knowledge, did any of your Justice Department staff 
      or your other associates communicate with Amanda Renteria? If so, who, what 
      did they discuss, and when did the communications occur?
      
  5. During your time in the Justice Department, did you ever have communications 
      with Rep. Wasserman Schultz, her staff, her associates, or any other current 
      or former DNC officials about the Clinton email investigation? If so, please 
      describe the communications and provide all records relating to them.
  
  6. To the best of your knowledge, did any of your Justice Department staff or 
      your other associates communicate with Rep. Wasserman Schultz, her staff, 
      her associates, or any other current or former DNC officials about the 
      Clinton email investigation? If so, please describe the communications and 
      provide all records relating to them.
      
Thank you for your prompt attention to this important matter. If you have any questions, please contact Patrick Davis of Chairman Grassley's staff at (202) 224-5225, Heather Sawyer of Ranking Member Feinstein's staff at (202) 224-7703, Lee Holmes of Chairman Graham's staff at(202) 224-5972, or Lara Quint of Ranking Member Whitehouse's staff at (202) 224-2921.

Sincerely, 

Charles E. Grassley
Chairman Committee on the Judiciary

Diane Feinstein
Ranking Member Committee on the Judiciary
