Jan 11, 2018

Dear Mr. Levy:
 
Following the release of the transcript of Mr. Simpson’s interview with the Senate Judiciary Committee, several media outlets wrote stories citing his claim that the FBI had told Mr. Steele it had a voluntary walk-in source inside the Trump organization or campaign. Reporters, however, subsequently indicated that “sources close to Fusion” said Mr. Simpson had “mischaracterized” that to the Committee.[1] Rather than “a human source from inside the Trump organization” who was “someone like us who decided to pick up the phone and report something,” as your client stated in his interview,[2] sources close to Fusion reportedly told journalists that Mr. Simpson was actually referencing the Australian diplomat who reportedly passed along information in late July 2016 about a conversation with George Papadopoulos.
Given that sources close to your client are reportedly trying to correct the public record regarding his statements to the Committee about this purported source, the question arises as to whether or when your client plans to correct the Committee’s record. As his attorney, you spent roughly 14 hours reviewing and taking detailed notes on the transcript between October 5 and November 16, 2017. Yet neither you nor he has attempted to correct this alleged mischaracterization in his statements.
Please respond to the following questions by January 18, 2018:
 
  1. If it is true that your client’s statement to the Committee was a mischaracterization, when and how did he and/or you come to realize that it was a mischaracterization?
 
  2. If it is true that your client’s statement to the Committee was a mischaracterization, why did you not attempt to correct your client’s statement as soon as you and/or he realized it was not accurate?
 
Thank you for your prompt attention to this important matter. If you have any questions, please contact Patrick Davis of my Committee staff at (202) 224-5225.
 
 
Sincerely,
 
Charles E. Grassley
Chairman
Committee on the Judiciary
 
 
cc:
The Honorable Dianne Feinstein
Ranking Member
Senate Committee on the Judiciary
