Nov 15, 2016
Felix Sater: How I advised Trump and hunted Bin Laden
snob.ru/selected/entry/116532

How did you meet Trump?
He took the elevator, put his head in the office and asked: “Are you free?” And he answered: “Come in.” This was in 1999 when I started working in real estate and was the executive director of Bayrock. We had an office at Trump Tower, a floor below Trump’s own office. I just stood up and said that with me he will make more money than with any other partner. He laughed and introduced me to the director of his company ... The first joint project we had in Phoenix, Arizona: we bought land, wanted to build a tower, but did not agree on height ...

you are constantly in contact with Trump?
Yes, he likes everything to be right. And I reported to him about everything. Sometimes twice a day, sometimes twice a week, sometimes twice a month. And so ten years.

And what is his personal communication?
Do you know how he himself said? “I am an ordinary person, they just wrote about me many times in the newspapers.” When you are with him in the office, there are no formalities at all. You feel as if you are talking to a school friend. He is calm, easy, funny. It seems to everyone that he is very serious, but he has a great sense of humor. And he is very purposeful. Very confident in my opinion. But at the same time he does not consider that he is the center of the world. Yes, he knows how to attract attention to himself, but in personal conversations there is no feeling at all that a person thinks only of himself. Immediately he understands everything, immediately enters the conversation, instantly processes everything.

At the debate, he seemed different: narcissistic and nervous. Much more nervous than Clinton.
This is because he had many competitors, as many as 16 people in the primaries, and all were professional politicians. They practiced in front of the mirror for hours. But he doesn’t do that at all - what he thinks, he says. In fact, he never gets nervous! He is a very relaxed person. No tension.

I saw him live, he performs very professionally. Obviously, a team of speechwriters worked with him.
Of course, he had his big team. And many of these image makers and speechwriters tore the hair on his head, because this person cannot be trained and told him how to behave. It would never occur to any image-maker to create such an image! He put his imprint on every word of speechwriters. There is not a single person in this world who could prepare Donald Trump!

You had problems with the law. Trump is not embarrassed?
No, not embarrassed. He makes his decision about each person. He does not judge people by how they are written or spoken about.

1992, you and the "rose" attacked the visitor of the bar ...
Life is like that! I was 23 years old. Drunken brawl. As a Russian person does not understand! They put me in prison for this - and I lost my license and could no longer work on the New York Stock Exchange. The prosecutor said: now we will put the terrible financiers who are attacking the people. Although the guy I had a fight with was also a financier. After that, they didn't even take me as a driver.

In 1998, you were arrested for complicity in a $ 40 million fraud. The case also referred to the Italian mafia ...
I was a young guy, there was no other way out, my daughter was born, there was no money, but I could not get a job - it was recorded that I was a criminal. Yes, I contacted bad people on the stock exchange to make money. This was in 1994 and lasted only a year. And after that I began to interact with the state. We were 19 people, and 17 agreed to cooperate ...

So you became an informer?
No, I just collaborated. I was convicted only in 2009. If you continue to cooperate with law enforcement agencies, the state is delaying your sentence. My case was loud, but just so you understand - in 2009 I was sentenced to a symbolic fine of 25 thousand dollars. Attorney General Loretta Lynch said that the information I provided to the investigation was very valuable.

And if you did not cooperate, what would be the sentence?
Prison sentence for sure. Of course, I helped to help myself. Of course, I wanted the sentence to be easy. Who wants to go to jail? But I will say: they offered me back in 2000 that there was no time limit. I helped more than 20 charges! I very actively collaborated with the authorities. And even with her husband Hillary Clinton ...

Share, if this is not a secret.
I will not go into the details much. But I can tell you that I began the hunt for bin Laden back in 1998. Remember when Clinton launched rocket attacks on bin Laden’s bases, tracking his satellite phone? I brought this data to the American state! And after September 11, work has increased tenfold! I was in the most unpleasant points of the world, with the most dangerous people. Because I am an American citizen and consider myself a patriot of the country. Here some people write bad things about me, although they knew what I was doing. But they didn’t care!

It turns out that the man from the street was simply taken to the secret service?
Yes, these were unexpected life circumstances. I met a man who was in the military intelligence of America ... Well, and rolled one after another. I didn’t have any training and practice, but I also collected rockets in Afghanistan, and hunted bin Laden, and opened the financial scheme of those who blew up twin towers. The verdict said that perhaps I saved thousands of lives of American soldiers, and maybe even millions of lives of ordinary Americans.

Did you know about your secret service Trump?
Knew And very proud.

What are the your functions as a senior adviser to Trump?
So since 2011 I have not been an adviser. I went to another business. He began to engage in treatment technologies for all types of cancer.

And what was your relationship to the election campaign?
No

But you seem aware of her.
Well, I spoke with the team, with people. Everyone was shocked. When he won, I heard the word thirty times: unbelievable! Did anyone other than himself believe that he would become president? They did not believe, they were afraid. And he was confident and purposeful, he knew that two thousand people came to the meeting with Clinton, and twenty thousand on his rally . He did not believe the experts who said that not a single Latin American would vote for him, not a single woman would vote for him ...

Why did they vote?
I will now express my opinion: yes, he is a good businessman, he has achieved a lot, he wrote books, made a good television program. But the people voted for him, not because he is a star. Otherwise, Al Pacino would become president. The people voted because they felt that a change would occur. We have an atrophied political system. Instead of getting together and doing something for the people, the two parties put each other in the wheel. Media was brainwashed every day by people: it is bad, bad. But people have seen that this person can make the changes they dream of.

So he is in power. Do you, as a former adviser, expect to take some place with him?
No, it's not mine. Even if I was offered, I would refuse. I love a person very much, and they try to harm him because of me. Trying to use my actions 25 years ago and mess him with it. This is absurd for me, horror and injustice. Because of this, I will not be able to work with his administration.

As I understand it, you are sure that all the press against him seemed to be conspiring. But he did say terrible things, almost fascist.
My mother taught me from childhood that a tough truth is better than a beautiful lie. Yes, the person spoke wrong, unfair, tough. But he spoke from the heart! It is clear that not all Mexican migrants are raping. It is clear that not even Syrian refugees are raping! But he said it from the heart. He did not discuss with twenty advisers what to say! Who tells the truth in the eyes is your friend. And who beautifully lies in the eyes - your enemy. Therefore, many believed that Trump was telling the truth, even if he was speaking wrong. Well, yes, he said nonsense about women. But in the Trump Organization there were many women in leadership positions, and this was in those years when there were no women in the entire industry, except for secretaries. I know this man! He has - from each according to his abilities. It will be the president of the century. I do not know the last or the next. It will be very good for America.
