https://www.scribd.com/document/371381223/Carter-Page-October-2016-letter#fullscreen&from_embed

Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
Wallnerstrasse 6 1010 
Vienna, Austria

Dame Audrey Glover
Head of OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission (EOM), United States of America
Washington, DC

Dear Chairman Steinmeier and Dame Glover:

I am writing to provide you with relevant information regarding several recent irregularities of the 2016 U.S. election vis-à-vis the OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) inventory of election-related norms, commitments, principles, and good  practices. I believe this may significantly assist the ongoing work of your Election Observation Mission (EOM) in the United States. I am not currently affiliated with any  political campaign, but the continued personal attacks by the “Hillary for America” campaign against me based on completely fabricated, inaccurate information help to clearly demonstrate these violations.[1] Although many aspects of this year’s election are under question, I suspect you may find the facts in my case to be among the most egregious abuses of core democratic principles.
Paragraph 7.1 of the 2003 Inventory of OSCE Commitments and Other Principles for Democratic Elections summarizes the cornerstone violation of democratic norms which have  been damaged in this instance:

  “The participating States reaffirm that[1] everyone will have the right to freedom of expression including the right to communication. This right will include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by  public authority and regardless of frontiers.”[2]

On July 7, 2016, I gave a university lecture before members of the academic community at the New Economic School in Moscow based on my past scholarly research. This visit to the territory of the OSCE member state Russia was outside of my role with the Donald J. Trump for President campaign at the time and I made clear on multiple occasions that my speech did not necessarily reflect the views of anyone other than myself. Nonetheless, the new ideas in my presentation unexpectedly led to significant interest among Russian, European and American observers since it reflected a major departure from recent policy approaches which have in my opinion severely damaged security and cooperation in Europe throughout recent decades.
As retribution for these new ideas, on August 27, 2016, the Democratic Leader of the U.S. Senate Harry Reid sent a letter to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigations James Comey calling for a personal investigation of me based on the following incorrect statement: “Questions have been raised about whether a Trump advisor who has been highly critical of US. and European economic sanctions on Russia, and who has conflicts of interest due to investments in Russian energy conglomerate Gazprom, met with high-ranking sanctioned individuals while in Moscow in July of 2016, well after Trump became the presumptive Republican nominee. (The same individual recently broke precedent by giving a speech critical of US. policy while in Moscow.).”[3] This clear instance of suppression of dissent stands as an obvious attempt to silence me on an important issue of national and international consequence.
As noted in the 2003 Inventory of OSCE Commitments for Democratic Elections, paragraph 7.10, “States should provide an adequate opportunity, on an equitable and non-discriminatory  basis, for election contestants to inform the public about their candidacies and political  programmes, including through the state media.” In keeping with the longstanding Cold War-era paranoia about Russia and although my academic lecture had no connection to the U.S. election, the discriminatory press reports against me reached proportions not seen since the 1950’s based on baseless and defamatory assertions made by the Clinton campaign.
In this regard, a particularly outrageous news article on September 23 was almost entirely attributable to the "Hillary for America” campaign:

  “But U.S. officials have since received intelligence reports that during that same three-day trip, Page met with Igor Sechin, a longtime Putin associate and former Russian deputy prime minister who is now the executive chairman of Rosneft, Russian’s leading oil company, a well-placed Western intelligence source tells Yahoo  News. That meeting, if confirmed, is viewed as especially problematic by U.S. officials because the Treasury Department in August 2014 named Sechin to a list of Russian officials and businessmen sanctioned over Russia’s “illegitimate and unlawful actions in the Ukraine.” (The Treasury announcement described Sechin as ‘utterly loyal to Vladimir Putin — a key component to his current standing.’ At their alleged meeting, Sechin raised the issue of the lifting of sanctions with Page, the Western intelligence source said.
 
  “U.S. intelligence agencies have also received reports that Page met with another top Putin aide while in Moscow — Igor Diveykin. A former Russian security official, Diveykin now serves as deputy chief for internal policy and is believed by U.S. officials to have responsibility for intelligence collected by Russian agencies about the U.S. election, the Western intelligence source said.”[4]
On countless occasions over the months prior, many other journalists from some of the leading news agencies in the U.S. had contacted me to ask about precisely these same two meeting allegations. A few of those whom I pressed to provide some basis or source for these outrageous lies disclosed that it was the “Hillary for America” campaign which originally suggested it to them. Although most of these reporters avoided the persuasion to take this false bait, at last the Clinton campaign achieved their goal by finding a compliant media ally and put out an equally false press release just minutes after the aforementioned article was released that afternoon.[5] Since these lies by the “Hillary for America” organization related to a trip that was completely unrelated to my prior activities in support of the Trump campaign, I decided to take a break from this movement on September 25 so that I could more effectively fight these allegations independently and not create a further distraction for my colleagues.
As per paragraph 7.5 of the 2003 Inventory of OSCE Commitments, “States shall provide, through the state media and other means, for effective programmes of voter information and education.” The opposite has been the case for information put forward by the “Hillary for America” organization against me and subsequently supported by the anonymous “U.S. officials” as quoted in the sample article of September 23, above.
As noted by the OSCE: “With respect to freedom of expression during elections, the European Court of Human Rights has called for governments to ‘display restraint’ and to accept that even offensive, shocking, and disturbing speech can contribute to pluralism and must usually be tolerated in a democratic society. This is especially true during electoral campaigns and of speech that ‘targets’ government authorities, elected officials, and candidates for office.”[6] Notwithstanding these basic human rights principles, I have included my July Moscow speech for reference as an Appendix. I am confident you will agree that it is not offensive, shocking, or disturbing in any way, except perhaps from the perspective of those hawkish parties which maintain a preference for what I have previously pointed out to  be failed interventionist approaches. For example, the segment on “Redefining policies of unilateral disrespect, inequality and unsanctioned intervention: The foundations of outside influence in Central Asia” in my Moscow speech (in the Appendix, below).
In summary, such partisan manoeuvres stand contrary to the previously cited OSCE Principles for Democratic Elections, namely: “Freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers.”
All of the available evidence makes clear that I have been targeted for potential reprisal merely for vocalizing my thoughts in a free academic forum. I would echo the sentiment that several supporters of mine have noted when they express continued concern that one formidable party in an OSCE member country election has unjustly targeted me for this speech. As a further related form of their retaliation, I have learned from a reliable source that a law firm close to the Clinton campaign has hired a London-based private investigator to investigate my trip to Russia. This approach is closely consistent with past tactics that investigators affiliated with Mrs. Clinton have historically taken toward their targeted victims: “Impugn… character and veracity until… destroyed beyond all recognition.”[7]
I apologize for addressing this to you directly, but it may be one of few potential alternatives given the current activities of Senator Harry Reid and other “Hillary for America” partners that violate the Article 10 principles of the European Convention on Human Rights as they have unsuccessfully tried to intimidate me. Per the “Hillary for America” statement of October 19, “Carter Page is being probed by U.S. intelligence agencies for meeting with sanctioned Kremlin officials including Igor Diveykin.” Although I have never met this year with any sanctioned Kremlin official nor been contacted by any of the U.S. intelligence agencies following my July visit to Moscow, the evidence of certain connections between the “Hillary for America” campaign and some federal authorities makes me cautious to avoid seeking external support from government officials in the United States. Despite the fact that over three weeks had already passed following my formal, personal appeal to FBI Director Comey on September 25, 2016[8] and after these conspiracy theories had seemingly been put to rest in the media, many of the same false claims by the “Hillary for America” organization were still being pushed in their October 19, 2016 press release which I previously cited.
By way of background, this ongoing series of vindictive personal attacks came at virtually the same time as the contents of Mrs. Clinton’s personal email server were being publicized and scrutinized – making these unwarranted vendetta tactics a convenient distraction technique at the time. Although I am not an expert in these email proceedings and have no information beyond what is available in the press, some of these revelations nonetheless seem to violate other elements of the 2003 Inventory of OSCE Commitments for Democratic Elections.
s noted in the 1990 meeting of representatives of the participating states of OSCE’s  predecessor organization, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE):
  “They recognize that pluralistic democracy and the rule of law are essential for ensuring respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms, the development of human contacts and the resolution of other issues of a related humanitarian character. They therefore welcome the commitment expressed by all participating States to the ideals of democracy and  political pluralism as well as their common determination to build democratic societies based on free elections and the rule of law.”[9] Thank you for your current and future planned activities which may potentially help to now revitalize such principles in the United States.
Having previously served as an Arms Control Action Officer in the Pentagon during my service in the U.S. Navy, I have worked in the past on issues related to the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) and other initiatives of the OSCE’s predecessor, the CSCE. On more of a strategic level, the collateral damage of these personal human rights abuses against me could undoubtedly have a negative impact on the future trajectory of security and cooperation in Europe if not properly addressed.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you would like any further information on these violations. I will be in Europe and Africa until November 1st, but would be happy to meet with members of the EOM following my return to the United States.

Sincerely,

Carter Page, Ph.D
Appendix:
Speech Transcript, New Economic School, July 7, 2016

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

Footnotes:

1. Among the most recent, see "Hillary for America" press release of October 19, 2016. https://www.hillaryclinton.com/briefing/factchecks/2016/10/19/15-facts-about-donald-trumps-deeply-unsettling-russia-problem-and-wikileaks/
2. OSCE/ODIHR, "Existing Commitments for Democratic Elections in OSCE Participating States, a Progress Report," 6 October 2003, 17. ["Incorporates parts of Copenhagen Document Paragraph 9  concerning the rights of free expression (including communications), peaceful assembly and demonstration, and association."]
3. https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/3035844/Reid-Letter-to-Comey.pdf
4. Michael Isikoff, "U.S. intel officials probe ties between Trump adviser and Kremlin," Yahoo News, September 23, 2016.
5. Hillary for America, "Hillary for America Statement on Bombshell Report About Trump Aide's Chilling Ties to Kremlin," September 23, 2016. https://www.hillaryclinton.com/briefing/statements/2016/09/23/hillary-for-america-statement-on-bombshell-report-about-trump-aides-chilling-ties-to-kremlin/
6. OSCE/ODIHR, "Existing Commitments," 2003, 69-70.
7. Megan Twohey, "How Hillary Clinton Grappled with Bill Clinton's Infidelity, and His Accusers," New York Times, October 2, 2016.
8. Carter Page, Letter to The Honorable James Comey, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, September 25, 2016.
9. Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, "Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the Conference of the Human Dimension of the CSCE," 29 June 1990.
