Oct 30, 2017
Carter Page gives another 'awesomely stupid' interview
vanityfair.com/news/2017/10/carter-page-gives-another-awesomely-stupid-interview

Of all the secrets, spycraft, and disinformation swirling around the Trump-Russia scandal, one of the biggest question marks is former Trump campaign policy adviser Carter Page, who is either supremely confident of his innocence, supremely foolish, or perhaps a little bit of both. After seemingly coming out of nowhere to join Donald Trump’s campaign as a self-described Russian energy expert, most people forgot about Page until it emerged that he was being probed for potential ties to Russia. This past April, he admitted that he had been in communication with a Russian intelligence operative who tried to recruit him but, according to a sealed F.B.I. document, concluded that he was “an idiot.” As if to back up the Russian’s assessment, Page rushed to set the record straight on Good Morning America, where he struggled to respond when asked whether he had ever told the Russians that Trump would be open to easing sanctions if elected. “I mean—it may—topics—I don’t remember—we’ll see what comes out in this FISA transcript,” he stumbled. “I don’t recall every single word that I ever said. . . . Something may have come up in a conversation.”
On Monday night, he was at it again.
Having inexplicably agreed to appear on All In with Chris Hayes, hours after news broke that former Trump campaign manager Paul Manafort had been indicted and former policy adviser George Papadopoulos had pleaded guilty to lying about his contacts with Russian officials, Page once again seemed oddly unprepared for somebody who has been investigated by the F.B.I.
“Congratulations on not being indicted,” Hayes began. Things got worse from there:
Hayes: Were you guys on e-mail chains together, you and Papadopoulos?
Page: Look, there is a lot of e-mails all over the place when you’re in a campaign.
Hayes: Yes or no. Were you on e-mail chains with Papadopoulos?
Page: Probably a few, yeah.
Hayes: Were you on e-mail chains about Russia?
Page: It may have come up from time to time. Again, there’s nothing major, yeah.
Hayes: Well, I mean, nothing major. It was enough for him to lie to federal investigators about and then plead guilty to that he was having an intermediary come to him and say you should come to London and talk to someone who has Hillary Clinton’s e-mails.
Page: Listen, I’ve been focused on other things today.
Page, who has now given more than a half-dozen such interviews in the press, still seems oddly assured that he’s in no legal danger. “Papadopoulos has been cooperating since July; I’ve been cooperating since March. I want to get the truth out there,” he told Hayes. While he has drawn fire for taking a trip to Russia in the middle of the presidential campaign, he has said the excursion was unrelated to Trump. He didn’t bring a lawyer with him the last time he was questioned by congressional investigators, and it is not clear whether he will have counsel when he testifies before Congress again this week.
Page maintains that his name will be cleared when the unverified Steele dossier, which alleges that he was offered bribes to help lift U.S. economic sanctions on Russia, is disproved. Until then, it doesn’t seem like his continued television appearances are helping. “Carter Page is awesomely stupid,” tweeted California Congressman Ted Lieu. Hayes himself seemed almost worried about his interview subject. “I legitimately hope you’re innocent of everything, because you’re doing a lot of talking.”
