Oct 30, 2017
Twitter Has a Field Day With Chris Hayes’ Carter Page Interview: ‘This Is So Weird’
mediaite.com/tv/twitter-has-a-field-day-with-chris-hayes-carter-page-interview-this-is-so-weird

This evening, MSNBC’s Chris Hayes scored an interview with former Trump campaign advisor Carter Page. Of course, the very announcement that Page was willing to do a television hit was eye-opening considering that the day consisted of former Trump campaign chair Paul Manafort being indicted in the Mueller probe and the revelation that ex-Trump campaign advisor George Papadopoulos had pled guilty to charges of lying to the FBI about his Russia ties.
Page, who is also being scrutinized over his Russia connections while a member of Trump’s campaign, has had a history of giving ill-advised and, quite frankly, strange interviews since he was highlighted as a person of interest in the Russia probe. In fact, the most infamous of those interviews was with Hayes back in March. So, yes, it definitely seemed odd that Page would agree to an on-air discussion this evening.
While it wasn’t nearly as nutty as Page’s past interviews, it did give us some memorable exchanges, such as this:

  Hayes: Were you guys on e-mail chains together, you and Papadopoulos?
  Page: Look, there is a lot of e-mails all over the place when you’re in a campaign.
  Hayes: Yes or no. Were you on e-mail chains with Papadopoulos?
  Page: Probably a few, yeah.
  Hayes: Were you on e-mail chains about Russia?
  Page: It may have come up time and time again there is nothing major, yeah.
  Hayes: Well, I mean, nothing major. It was enough for him to lie to federal investigators about and then plead guilty to that he was having an intermediary come to him and say you should come to London and talk to someone who has Hillary Clinton’s e-mails.
  Page: Listen, I’ve been focused on other things today
  
The rest of the interview mostly featured Page denying that he knew anything about Russian hacking or Papadopoulos attempting to set up meetings between Vladimir Putin and Trump.
