Apr 4, 2017
Trump campaign associate passed documents to a Russian spy who thought he was "an idiot"
vanityfair.com/news/2017/04/carter-page-victor-podobnyy#~o

With the swirl of intrigue surrounding the Russian government’s efforts to influence the 2016 election, and its many ties to Team Trump, it may come as no surprise that one of Donald Trump’s former advisers was reportedly targeted for recruitment and shared documents with a Russian spy before joining the real-estate mogul’s campaign.
BuzzFeed News was the first to report that Carter Page, an energy consultant who worked for the Trump campaign, first came in contact with Russian intelligence operative Victor Podobnyy at an energy conference in New York in January 2013 and subsequently “met with, e-mailed with, and provided documents to [Podobnyy] about the energy business,” according to a sealed F.B.I. complaint. The U.S. government would go on to charge Podobnyy and two others for “acting as unregistered agents of a foreign government” in January 2015, after investigators cracked “a Russian spy ring that was seeking information on U.S. sanctions as well as efforts to develop alternative energy.” Page, as we know, would go on to work for the Trump campaign, “rising to prominence seemingly out of nowhere last summer,” though, as BuzzFeed notes, he “was quickly cut from the Trump team following reports that federal investigators were probing his ties to Russian officials.”
ABC News has more:

  According to the document, the FBI interviewed Page as part of the investigation 
  stemming from the indictment of three Russian men identified as agents of the 
  Russian overseas intelligence agency, the S.V.R. One of them, Evgeny Buryakov, 
  was operating undercover as an executive in the New York office of a Russian 
  development bank. The Buryakov case resurfaced in headlines last week when 
  President Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, revealed he had met with the head of 
  the same bank. Buryakov was sentenced to 30 months in prison as part of a plea 
  agreement, but he was released over the weekend and is awaiting deportation to Russia.
  
Page told ABC News in an interview Monday that he “didn’t want to be a spy” and “I’m not a spy.” If he was hoping for a career in the intelligence business, however, he won’t be getting any job recommendations from Podobnyy anytime soon, at least according to the transcript of Podobnyy’s conversation with another Russian spy busted in the ring, Igor Sporyshev:

  “[Male-1] wrote that he is sorry, he went to Moscow and forgot to check his inbox, 
  but he wants to meet when he gets back. I think he is an idiot and forgot who I am...
  ...He got hooked on Gazprom thinking that if they have a project, he could rise up...
  ...“I also promised him a lot . . . this is intelligence method to cheat, how else to 
  work with foreigners? You promise a favor for a favor. You get the documents from him 
  and tell him to go fuck himself.”
  
BuzzFeed News confirmed Monday that Page is “Male-1” and that he had had contact with Podobnyy, who was working undercover in New York City at the time. According to Page, “their interactions did not include anything sensitive.”
