Apr 29, 2015
Fugitive oligarch's £25m mansion sold to pay creditors
telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/11570696/Fugitive-oligarchs-25m-mansion-sold-to-pay-creditors.html

A country estate has been sold for £25 million after it was seized from a fugitive Kazakh billionaire believed to be hunted by gangsters, it has emerged.
Mukhtar Ablyazov - who is alleged to have siphoned off £3.2 billion of bank assets in one of the biggest frauds of its type - was convicted of contempt of court in 2012 by a High Court judge.
The businessman was found to have lied about owning Oaklands Park, a 100-acre estate in Surrey with a 12,000 sq/ft main home and four further cottages.
But a judge said a prosecution had proved Oaklands Park and another mansion in Hampstead were his and the properties were seized so they could be sold to pay creditors.
Despite an arrest warrant issued and airports told to keep an eye out, Ablyazov managed to evade authorities and flee the UK.
His Surrey mansion, formerly owned by American tech tycoon Michael Dell, has a palatial main home boasting has six main bedroom suites, five reception rooms and an indoor swimming pool.
There are also four further cottages, two log cabins and a pair of American barns comprising 33 stables. On top of this the estate has a full size polo pitch and formal gardens.
It was put on the market in with Savills in September 2013 for £25 million and was sold this month.
A spokesman for Savills, which was acting on behalf of the receivers, KPMG, declined to comment on the sale.
But at £25 million, it is among the biggest known deals to be struck outside the M25.
The sale is yet to be logged with Land Registry, and it is unknown whether the property was bought by a company or an individual.
"Price paid data" from the Land Registry states the highest price paid by an individual rather than a company was £20.7 million for an estate in Godalming.
Henry Pryor, an independent buying agent, viewed the property for a client but had concerns because of it controversial former owner.
He said: "This is one of the classic homes to which so many of the super-rich aspire.
"Built by one of the country's specialist country house builders it has all the toys - pool, games room, and staff accommodation and with scope to update and improve since being built at the turn of the century.
"This relatively small part of the country is where many millionaires go shopping.
"Rubbing shoulders with like-minded people, the chance to bump into the Queen out riding perhaps in Windsor Great Park, this is a home that says 'I've arrived'.
"If you've already got your Mayfair mansion and are looking for 21st century country life then this is the sort of property you'd hope Father Christmas would deliver.
"But having watched too many James Bond films, I was concerned that if one of the Kazakhstan banker's 'associates' didn't get his change of address card then my client could get an unpleasant visit.
"Tempting though it was to make the creditors an offer they couldn't refuse, my client decided to pass on the property and we bought something with a less colourful past."
Ablyazov, 51, moved to the UK in 2009 after the BTA bank he had run collapsed with £11.8 billion debts. A number of western banks lent to BTA, including Barclays, HSBC and Royal Bank of Scotland.
He was given asylum and police protection after an assassination plot was uncovered.
But he was later convicted of contempt of court after trying to hide more than £34 million of assets from creditors.
He had bought Oaklands Park through a Seychelles company in 2006 for £18.15 million, visiting the property at weekends.
Ablyazov fled the UK after he was sentenced to 22 months in prison. He is currently thought to be in France awaiting extradition to either Russia or Ukraine.
Supporters of the dissident businessman claim the fraud claims are politically motivated. Ablyazov has been a vocal opponent of the Kazakhstan president, Nursultan Nazarbayev.
